{"markdown":"\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\nhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11571-023-09952-0\n\n# RESEARCH ARTICLE\n\n# Differential behaviors of calcium-induced calcium release in one dimensional dendrite by Nernst–Planck equation, cable model and pure diffusion model\n\nYinyun Li1,2\n\nReceived: 10 October 2022 / Revised: 16 February 2023 / Accepted: 8 March 2023 / Published online: 6 April 2023\n\nÓ The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2023\n\n# Abstract\n\nThe source and dynamics of calcium is the key factor that regulates dendritic integration. Apart from the voltage-gated and ligand-gated calcium influx, an important source of calcium is from inner store of endoplasmic reticulum with a regenerative process of calcium-induced calcium release (CICR). To trigger this process, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and calcium are needed to satisfy certain requirements. The aim of our paper is to investigate how the CICR depends on the dynamics of membrane potential. We utilize one dimensional dendritic model to calculate membrane potential by Nernst–Planck Equation (NPE) and cable model and Pure Diffusion (PD) model, computational simulations are carried out to inject the calcium influx by synaptic stimulation and to predict subsequent CICR and calcium wave propagation. Our results demonstrate that CICR initiation and calcium wave propagation have much difference between electro-diffusion process of NPE and cable model. We find that cable model has lower threshold of IP3 stimulation to trigger CICR but is more difficult for calcium propagation than NPE, PD model requires even higher threshold of IP3 to initiate CICR process and calcium duration is shorter than NPE; the regenerative calcium wave propagates with faster speed in NPE than that in cable model and in PD model. Our work addresses the important role of electro-diffusion dynamics of charged ions in regulating CICR process in dendritic structure; and provides theoretical predictions for neurological process which requires sustaining calcium for downstream signaling processes.\n\n# Keywords\n\nElectro-diffusion process, Nernst–Planck equation (NPE), Pure diffusion (PD) model, Calcium-induced calcium release (CICR), Cable model, Calcium wave, Voltage-gated channels, Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), Synaptic stimulation\n\n# Introduction\n\nImportance of calcium source in dendritic processing and synaptic plasticity. Neuron connects with each other by synapses and integrates the synaptic stimulations from dendrite into cell body. Calcium ions enter into dendrite or synapse via voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC) upon synaptic stimulation. The downstream of calcium wave propagation could produce functional differences in dendrites, where many mechanisms are responsive to the spatial-temporal dynamics of calcium (Adeoye et al. 2022; Berridge and Berridge 2002; Inoue et al. 2001; Johnston et al. 1996; Lee et al. 2016; Neymotin et al. 2015; Ross and Ross 2012; Schulte et al. 2022); for example, Ih (Neymotin et al. 2013; Neymotin et al. 2015; Yuste 2013) and synaptic plasticity [Collin et al. 2005; Karagas et al. 2019; Khan and Khan 2022; LaFerla and LaFerla 2002]. The information integration of dendrite is of great importance for neural communication, which is closely related with calcium dynamic (Johnston et al. 1996; Koch et al. 1983; LaFerla and LaFerla 2002; Neymotin et al. 2015; Stuart 2015; Stutzmann 2005).\n\n&#x26; Yinyun Li\n\nyinyun@bnu.edu.cn\n\n1 School of Systems Science, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China\n\n2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Washington State University Vancouver, Vancouver, USA\n\n1 3\n\n\n---\n\n\n# Cognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\nStudies reported that the asynchronous release utilized different source from P/Q type calcium channel (Martone et al. 1993; McCormick and Huguenard 1992; Winograd et al. 2008); and a second source of calcium propagated from axonal branch which coincide with asynchronous release onset (Schulte et al. 2022; Winograd et al. 2008). Experimental evidences have showed that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has been observed both in presynaptic terminal and postsynaptic dendrites (Collin et al. 2005; De Schutter and Smolen 1998; Goto et al. 2022; Khan and Khan 2022; Lu et al. 2007; Narita et al. 1998), and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is distributed throughout the cytosol in a connected way, through the dendrites and dendritic spines (Hille 1992; Neymotin et al. 2013; Stuart 2015). More and more evidence implies that ER provides the second calcium source (Berridge and Berridge 1998; Carter et al. 2002; Hong et al. 2007; Inoue et al. 2001). A generic mechanism for initiation and propagation of calcium waves has been described by calcium-induced calcium release (CICR) (Li et al. 1994; Ross 2012; Ross et al. 2005; Timofeeva 2003). When triggered by inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) (Allbritton et al. 1992; Taylor 2010; Terasaki et al. 1994) and calcium, the IP3 receptors (IP3Rs) would open and release calcium into the cytosol, regions of elevated calcium concentrations then spread throughout portions of the dendritic tree (Solovyova et al. 2002; Spacek et al. 1997; Watanabe et al. 2006); After excessive calcium ions release into the cytosol, the pump of ER (SERCA) can push cytosolic calcium into ER. The dynamics of calcium and IP3 may have impacts on the b-amploid production and its degradation, and the accumulation of b-amplod can cause neurotoxicity leading to Alzheimer’s diseases (Lagache et al. 2019; Pawar et al. 2022; Peercy 2008).\n\nQuestions as how fast CICR can initiate, how far regenerative calcium wave could arrive, and how fast it travels, as well as how much time the calcium wave sustains, are particularly critical in the process of calcium-dependent chemical reactions, and will be investigated in our work.\n\nAn additional complexity arises when we consider coupling to dendritic membrane calcium channels (Hong et al. 2007; Mori et al. 2011; Padamsey et al. 2019) and electro-diffusion process of the charged ions which regulates the membrane potential dynamics (Mahajan et al. 2019; Mori et al. 2011; Nakamura et al. 2002). As can be seen in the studies (Sætra et al. 2020; Solovyova et al. 2002; the electro-diffusion of charged ions may cause certain deviation in membrane potential from cable model, which could be amplified by the voltage-gated calcium channels via CICR. There is therefore a bidirectional interaction between chemical signaling and electrophysiology (Blackwell and Blackwell 2013; De Schutter et al. 2008; De Schutter and Smolen 1998).\n\n# CICR-critical dependence on the membrane potential and electro-diffusion process of charged ions\n\nThe timing of CICR initiation and traveling speed of calcium wave depend on two main factors (Peercy 2008; Pozzo Miller et al. 1996; Ross et al. 2005); one factor is ER properties, such as the IP3 production and its diffusion, based on the assumption that the distributions of IP3Rs and SERCA pumps are well defined; and the other factor is the calcium influx through voltage-dependent calcium channels, which is a necessary pre-condition for ignition of the cascade of CICR. In addition to the investigation of IP3 factor analysis, we especially address the factor of electro-diffusion of charged ions in shaping membrane potential dynamics which regulates calcium influx through voltage-gated calcium channels and CICR process and influences the sensitivity of the system to IP3 stimulation.\n\nNernst–Planck equation (NPE) describes electro-diffusion dynamics of charged ions (Larkum et al. 2003; Lu et al. 2000; Ross 2012). According to NPE, charged ions moves with two potentials, one is the chemical potential by concentration gradient; the other is the electric potential generated by the charged ions. Whereas, cable model simplifies the electro-diffusion process by neglecting the concentration gradient of the charged ions (Ross 2012); and the pure diffusion (PD) model neglects the electric potential and only considers the pure diffusion term in the equation of ions dynamics.\n\nThe question concerned in this paper is, how much difference could result from different membrane potential calculations between NPE, cable model and pure diffusion model, in aspects of the timing of CICR initiation, calcium magnitude and traveling speed, as well as sustaining period of calcium wave? To answer these questions, we construct a one-dimensional dendritic model with voltage-gated Na+ and K+, Ca2+ channels on the membrane. By assuming that ER is distributed throughout the dendritic cytosol, the dynamics of IP3 production and SERCA pump necessary for the occurrence of CICR is used. Our results demonstrate that tiny deviation of membrane potential by different models would lead to totally different results of calcium regeneration and wave propagation.\n\n# Organization of the paper\n\nThe paper is organized in the following manner. In Section “Materials and methods”, the one-dimensional dendritic model with different ion dynamics as electro-diffusion process by Nernst–Planck equation, cable model\n\n\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n# 1. Introduction\n\nand the pure diffusion model is presented firstly; secondly, the details of CICR process with IP3 dynamics and calcium dynamics of releasing, pumping and leaking are described; lastly, how to implement the algorithm into the one-dimensional dendritic model is illustrated. In Section III (Results), differential CICR processes are compared in aspects of initiation of calcium release, traveling velocity and duration among the three membrane potential calculations, with modifications of both IP3 and permeability of calcium channel. Our results with conclusions and discussions are presented in section ‘Conclusion and discussion’.\n\nCalcium concentration at rest is extremely low and its contribution to the resting membrane potential is ignored.\n\nThe term *p* = cmdVd presents the percentage of uncompensated ions for ᵏnᵏzᵏF⁴ increasing a unit voltage dV = 1mV. F is the Faraday constant with F = 96,480 C mol-1; and d is diameter of the dendrite, the default value in this paper is set as d = 1.0 µm; cm is membrane capacitance of the dendrite, with typical values of cm = 2.0 µF cm-1. The term nk is the concentration of charged ion k with the number of charges zk it carries.\n\n# 2. Materials and methods\n\nIn this section we present one-dimensional dendrite model with voltage-gated Na+ and K+, Ca2+ channels on dendritic membrane; synaptic stimulation is modeled by modulating the permeability of Na+ with an a function at location x = 20 µm along the 140 µm-long dendrite (Martone et al. 1993); Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz (GHK) equation is utilized to characterize voltage-gated membrane current. At the synaptic stimulation location x = 20 µm together with the influx of Na+ and Ca2+, IP3 is also assumed to be produced with an injection and follows a damped diffusion process.\n\nThe biophysical process of CICR is described briefly in the follows. By synaptic stimulation, the Na+, K+, Ca2+ ion channels react to changes of dendritic membrane potential which causes ion fluxes through membrane; together with the synaptic stimulation, IP3 will be produced with a damping diffusion. With proper level of dendritic calcium and IP3 concentration, CICR could be triggered. Both calcium and IP3 diffuse to neighborhood along the dendrite, where CICR could possibly occur if conditions are satisfied; thereafter, this consecutive process forms a calcium wave which propagates along the dendrite.\n\nFinally, if the calcium level in the dendrite is extremely high, SERCA pumps excessive calcium ions from dendritic cytosol into ER; therefore, high calcium level in dendrite could last for certain period of time depending on IP3 concentration; eventually calcium wave will be terminated by SERCA pumping process, which leaves the low calcium level in dendrite as before.\n\n# 3. One dimensional dendritic model with voltage-gated ion channels\n\nThe membrane potential is defined by the concentration of each charged ions:\n\n# 3.1 Electro-diffusion of ions with Nernst–Planck Equation (NPE)\n\nFor each ion k, the changes of their concentration results from the flux coming to or out of the volume, as the continuity equation indicates (Ross 2012):\n\n∂nk/∂t + ∇·Jk = 0\n\nwhere the flux Jk is caused by the chemical potential and electrical potential, which is known as the electro-diffusion process by the Nernst–Planck Equation (Ross 2012):\n\nJk = Dk∇nk + ak∇V;\n\nSynaptic stimulation induces membrane potential changes, which activates the voltage-gated ion channels and causes the membrane current Jm,k, as the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz (GHK) equation indicates (Johnston et al. 1996; Johnston and Miao-Sin 2001):\n\nJm,k = PkVnout/(1 - e-akV);\n\nwhere, Pk is the permeability of ion k. By inserting Eq. (3) into Eq. (2), and together with the membrane current Eq. (4), we have the electro-diffusion dynamics for each ion k [Ross 2012]:\n\n∂nk/∂t = Dk∇²nk + ak∇²V - Jm,k;\n\n1 3\n\n---\n\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\nFor Na+ and K+ ions, the dynamic equations are shown in the following:\n\nℂ\notnNa = DNa o2nNa oV + aNa on ox - d Jm;Na (5a)\n\notnK = DK o2nK oV + aK on ox - d Jm;K (5b)\n\nwhereas for Ca2+, there will be another term from inner store ER, which is the calcium-induced calcium release (CICR) from ER (the concentration of calcium in ER is denoted by S), as illustrated in the following:\n\notnCa = DCa o2nCa oV + aCa on ox - d Jm;Ca + p fJs + Jl (5c)\n\notS = DER o2S + p fJs - Jl (5d)\n\nwhere, JP is the IP3-triggered current releasing from ER to dendritic cytosol; Js is the pumping current by SERCA from dendritic cytosol back into ER; Jl is the leaking current from ER to dendritic cytosol.\n\nIn cable model, the concentration gradient is neglected by assuming onk = 0, and subsequently o2nk = 0. The dynamics of ion concentration becomes:\n\notnk = Dk o2nk - d Jm;k (6)\n\nOn the other hand, if the gradient of voltage is neglected, then Eq. (3) is left with only two terms of pure diffusion and membrane current, as shown in Eq. (7), we name it as Pure Diffusion (PD) model.\n\notnk = Dk o2nk - d Jm;k (7)\n\n# Calcium-induced calcium release from inner store ER\n\npstim;j is a parameter that can be adjusted for the stimulation strength of IP3; and the production of IP3 is chosen to be the same as the synaptic stimulation location xj = 20μm. JP, Js, Jl are adopted from the work (Padamsey et al. 2019) and described in the following:\n\nJP = PIP3R m3n3h3(S - nCa) (8a)\n\nJs = Pserca n2 K2 Ca2+ (8b)\n\nJl = Pleak nCa (8c)\n\nwhere, N = NA 6.02214129 × 105 is the number of molecules in a cubic micron at a concentration of 1mM, where NA is the Avogadro constant.\n\nFor the releasing current JP, the expression of m, n, h are shown in the following:\n\nm = p / (p + kIP3) (9a)\n\nn = nca / (nca + Kact) (9b)\n\ndh / dt = (h1 - h) / sh (9c)\n\nh1 = Kinh / (Kinh + nca) (9d)\n\nThe parameters used in the CICR process are listed in Table 1.\n\n# Implementation\n\nBy a synaptic stimulation at location of xj along the dendrite, the permeability of Na+ channel can be simulated with an a function:\n\nPNa = PNa;M(et/ts)4 e4t/ts (10)\n\nWe assume that IP3 production initiates together with synaptic stimulation. IP3 then diffuses along dendrite with a damping process by a time constant. The IP3 concentration p is produced at location xj transiently with damped diffusion (Pozzo Miller et al. 1996):\n\notp = D o2P + X pj (b(pj - pj)) (8)\n\nwhere, pj(t) = pstim;j ap et/ap (9)\n\nwhere, PNa;M is the maximum of Na+ channel permeability, and ts = 1ms. The membrane current of Na+ can be calculated by Eq. (4) with the dynamics of Eq. (10).\n\nThe membrane current of calcium is simulated by a function with a different time constant tsc = 3.5ms.\n\nPCa = PCa;M(et/tsc)4 e4t/tsc (11)\n\nwhere, PCa;M is the maximum permeability of calcium channel, which can be modulated to tune the calcium membrane current by Eq. (4); the values of other parameters can be seen in Table 2; in this way, one can examine\n\n1 3\n\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\nhow the initial influx of calcium membrane currents affect CICR process.\n\nThe releasing current Jp depends on the concentration of IP3 (Eqs. (8a) and (9a)). By starting from extremely low level of pstim;j and gradually increasing its value, differential CICR behaviors will be generated by NPE, PD and cable model in three aspects: (a) the timing of CICR initiation; (b) the speed of calcium wave propagation; (c) the sustaining time of calcium wave.\n\nOne of other parameters to modify the calcium wave generation and propagation is the maximum permeability of calcium channel PCa;M. Since calcium level controls the dynamics of the three physical quantities: Js in Eq. (8b), n in Eq. (9b), and h1 in Eq. (9d); the parameter constants correspondingly are Kserca = 0.0001 mM; Kact = 0.0004 mM; Kinh = 0.0019 mM (Table 1), it becomes more complicated.\n\nThe calcium level in the dendritic cytosol Ca2+d determines the pumping current Js (Eq. (8b)). If calcium level is much lower than kserca (Ca2+d &#x3C; Kserca), then there will be no pumping process: Js = 0. If dendritic calcium level is extremely high, Ca2+d > Kserca, then Js approaches to a maximum value, indicating that the dendritic calcium will be pumped back to ER with the highest effort.\n\nSecondly, the releasing current Jp is also controlled by the parameter n (Eq. (8a),) which is determined by the dendritic calcium level Ca2+d (Eq. (9b)). When calcium level is much lower than Kact; Ca2+d &#x3C; Kact, n goes to zero, indicating that the releasing process is not activated, i.e. Jp = 0. If Ca2+d is extremely high, i.e. Ca2+d > Kact, then n approaches to 1, indicating that the releasing process is fully activated.\n\nThirdly, Ca2+d also controls the inhibition of releasing process. If calcium level reaches a threshold which is much...\n\n| Parameter name | Value                           |\n| -------------- | ------------------------------- |\n| PIP3R          | 120; 400 molecules ℂ mM1 ℂ ms-1 |\n| kserca         | 0.0001 mM                       |\n| Pserca         | 1.9565 molecules ℂ ms-1         |\n| Pleak          | 18.06 molecules ℂ mM-1 ℂ ms-1   |\n| kIP3           | 0.00013 mM                      |\n| Kserca         | 0.0001 mM                       |\n| Kact           | 0.0004 mM                       |\n| Kinh           | 0.0019 mM                       |\n| ap             | 100 ms                          |\n| bp             | 0.022 µM                        |\n| b              | 0.001 ms-1                      |\n| tp             | 0 ms                            |\n\n| Parameter name                    | Symbol | Value                    |\n| --------------------------------- | ------ | ------------------------ |\n| Diameter of dendrite              | d      | 1.0 µm                   |\n| Diffusion coefficient for K+      | D      | 1.96 µm2 ℂ ms-1          |\n| Diffusion coefficient for Na+     | DNa    | 1.33 µm2 ℂ ms-1          |\n| Diffusion coefficient for Ca(cyt) | DCa    | 0.08 µm2 ℂ ms-1          |\n| Diffusion coefficient for Ca(ER)  | DER    | 0.08 µm2 ℂ ms-1          |\n| Diffusion coefficient for IP3     | DIP3   | 1.415 µm2 ℂ ms-1         |\n| Permeability of K, rest           | PK     | 3.64E-6 cm ℂ s-1         |\n| Permeability of Na, rest          | PNa    | 6.07E-8 cm ℂ s-1         |\n| Permeability of Na, max           | PNa;M  | 6.07E-4 cm ℂ s-1         |\n| Permeability of Ca2+, rest        | PCa    | 1.0 E-10 cm ℂ s-1        |\n| Fraction of cytosol               | fcyt   | 0.7                      |\n| Fraction of ER                    | fER    | 0.3                      |\n| Time constant of Na               | tpNa   | 1.0 ms                   |\n| Time constant of Ca               | tpCa   | 3.5 ms                   |\n| Capacitance of dendrite           | cm     | 2 µF ℂ cm-2              |\n| Faraday’s constant                | F      | 96,480 C ℂ mol-1         |\n| Atomic constant                   | R      | 8.31446 Joul mol-1 ℂ K-1 |\n\n1 3\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\nhigher than the inhibition parameter K; Ca2+ [ then h approaches to zero, which indicates that the releasing current Jp will be inhibited and eventually Jp decreases to zero. If Ca2+ d Kinh, then h1 will approach to 1, which indicates that there is no inhibition to the releasing current Jp.\n\nThe initial condition for each ion k is set as nk(x; 0) = nk,rest; the boundary condition is set as nk(0; t) = nk(L; t) = nk,rest.\n\nThe initial value of calcium in ER in Eq. (5d) is SCa (ER) = fER Caave fcyt; where, fER is the fraction occupied by the ER, fER = 0.17; and fcyt denotes the fraction occupied by the cytosol, fcyt = 0.83, Caave = 0.0017 mM (Padamsey et al. 2019).\n\nThe simulations are carried out by numerical solving coupled differential equations in Fortran, and the time step for the simulation is dt = 0.01 ms, the space step is dx = 0.5 μm; Since there is a diffusion coefficient and the simulation differentiation needs to satisfy the condition √(D dt) &#x3C; 0.5 that guarantee the solution is not diverging.\n\nThe boundary conditions are free boundary conditions.\n\n# Results\n\nDifferent behavior of CICR including the induction of CICR, the propagation speed of calcium wave and the sustaining duration in NPE, cable model and pure diffusion model will be presented in this section, respectively. The main results highlight the amplification effect of in the CICR process by considering electro-diffusion in the sub-compartment of neurons. We tune our parameters to match the speed of the wave propagation within a reasonable region as observed in experiments, with different models the speed of calcium wave varies largely. Therefore, how to explain the observed experimental data is of great significance, since the mechanism of calcium signaling and dynamics needs to be carefully considered.\n\n# Differential CICR process by three models with increasing IP₃ application\n\nOnly cable model can trigger CICR for extremely low level of IP3.\n\nFor extremely small value of pstim;j = 0.0001 mM ℂ ms-1, only cable model can trigger CICR, while the electro-diffusion with NPE and pure diffusion (PD) model cannot. By NPE, it does not trigger CICR process (Fig. 1A red solid curve), as indicated by the calcium decaying dynamics after the influx of membrane current through the voltage-gated calcium channels. SERCA pumps the calcium out of dendrite into ER (red dashed curve in Fig. 1A), to approach a stabilization state around Ca2+ = 0.01074 mM. In Fig. 1A, without regenerative ER calcium release, there is no calcium increase at further regions of x = 70 μm (blue solid curve) and x = 120 μm (green solid curve).\n\nOn the contrary, in cable model, CICR can be triggered and dendritic calcium increases to a much higher magnitude by a fast speed (Fig. 1B red solid curve); and it lasts for almost 2 s peaked around 0.005 mM; this calcium comes from ER as shown in the red dashed curve, which decreases until calcium in dendrite reaches maximum level around 200 ms; after that, SERCA in ER begins to pump calcium out of dendrite into itself until 2 s later, where it approaches a higher stationary state with Ca2+ ER = 0.0251 mM.\n\nTo further investigate why cable model can trigger CICR at x = 20 μm but NPE cannot, we have plotted the currents of Jp, Js, Jl for both NPE and cable model at x = 20 μm, as shown in Fig. 1C (NPE) and Fig. 1D (cable model). The releasing current Jp from ER to dendritic cytosol in cable model (Fig. 1D red curve) is much higher than the pumping current Js (Fig. 1D blue) and leaking current Jl (Fig. 1D magenta); whereas, in NPE, the pumping current Js (Fig. 1C blue) is higher than the releasing current Jp (Fig. 1C red). The concentration of IP3 is the same for both models (Fig. 1G H red solid lines); therefore, it indicates that it is not the factor of m that causes the difference. In fact, the dynamics of n is quite different (Fig. 1G H blue curves), which corresponds to different calcium levels in Fig. 1A and B.\n\nMore interestingly, due to no pure diffusion assumption in cable model (Fig. 1F light green curve) it constrains much more calcium than that in NPE (Fig. 1E light green), even though both model have the same membrane currents (magenta curves in Fig. 1E and F). We believe this is the core reason why CICR only occurs in cable model but not in NPE with this parameter set. Due to the initial higher calcium level in cable model, it can trigger the regenerative CICR process but not in NPE.\n\nIn addition, in cable model, this calcium wave did not travel 50 microns to x = 70 μm (Fig. 1H dashed curves). Even though calcium has a long-lasting high magnitude at x = 20 μm; due to the assumption of no concentration-gradient induced diffusion in cable model, the dynamics of n does not get boosted (Fig. 1H blue dashed line). For x = 120 μm, there is no calcium membrane current nor diffused calcium from injection point x = 20 μm. CICR does not occur at x = 120 μm either.\n\n1 3\n\n---\n\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\n# 1291\n\n| 0.01          | 0.025         | B            | Ca at x=20um |      |      |     |     |\n| ------------- | ------------- | ------------ | ------------ | ---- | ---- | --- | --- |\n| A             | Ca at x=70um  |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.02          | Ca at x=120um |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.008         | Ca at x=20um  | ER at x=20um |              |      |      |     |     |\n| Ca at x=70um  | ER at x=70um  |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| Ca at x=120um | ER at x=120um |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 20            | ERx=20um      | 00.015       |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.006         | ERx=70um      |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| ERx=120um     |               |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.004         | 0.01          |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.002         | 0.005         |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0             | c             |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 1000          | 2000          | 3000         | 4000         | 5000 | o    |     |     |\n| 1000          | 2000          | 3000         | 4000         | 5000 |      |     |     |\n| time(ms)      | time(ms)      |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 3×10^6        | C             | 𝑎           | 0.000012     | D    | $    |     |     |\n| 2.5×10^6      | 0.00001       |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 202x10^8}     | 20            | 8x10         |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 1.5×106       | 6x10          |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 10            | 4x108         |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 5x10'7        | 2x10          |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0             |               |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0             | 1000          | 2000         | 3000         | 4000 | 5000 |     |     |\n| 0             | 1000          | 2000         | 3000         | 4000 | 5000 |     |     |\n| time(ms)      | time(ms)      |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.0008        | E             | pure         |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.0007        | F             | V related    |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.0006        | ele           | mem          |              |      |      |     |     |\n| mem           | 0.0006        | JpJsJI       |              |      |      |     |     |\n| JpJsJI        |               |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.0004        | 0.0005        |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 20            | 20            |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.0002        | 0.0004        |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0             | 30.0003       |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| -0.0002       | 0.0002        |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| -0.0004       | 0.0001        |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0             |               |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0             | 20            | 40           | 60           | 80   | 100  | 120 | 140 |\n| 0             | 20            | 40           | 60           | 80   | 100  | 120 | 140 |\n| time(ms)      | time(ms)      |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| G             | m at x=20um   |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| H             | m at x=20um   |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.8           | n at x=20um   | n at x=20um  |              |      |      |     |     |\n| h at x=20um   | 0.8           | h at x=20um  |              |      |      |     |     |\n| m at x=70um   | m at x=70um   |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| n at x=70um   | n at x=70um   |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.6           | h at x=70um   | n0.6         | h at x=70um  |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.4           | 0.4           |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n| 0.2           | 0.2           |              |              |      |      |     |     |\n\nFig. 1 Only cable model (B, D, F, H) can trigger CICR but the electro-diffusion with NPE cannot (A, C, E, G) for extremely low value of pstim; j ¼ 0:0001 mM ℂ ms 1. PCa;M ¼ 1:0 10 6lm ℂ ms 1. In Fig. (A) and (B), the solid curve implies the calcium concentration in dendritic cytosol at locations of x ¼ 20lm (red), x ¼ 70lm (blue), x ¼ 120lm (green); whereas the dashed curve implies the calcium concentration in ER. In Fig. (C) and (D), “Jp; Js; Jl” imply the releasing current, pumping current and leak current, respectively. In Fig. E and F, “pure” implies the pure diffusion current term, “ele” indicates the electro-diffusion current and “mem” indicates the membrane current.\n\n\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\n# Fig. 2 Induction of CICR by increasing pstim;j in NPE.\n\n| 0.01  | A             | 0.01  | B             |\n| ----- | ------------- | ----- | ------------- |\n| 0.008 | Ca at x=20um  | 0.008 | Ca at x=20um  |\n|       | Ca at x=70um  |       | Ca at x=70um  |\n|       | Ca at x=120um |       | Ca at x=120um |\n| 0     | ER at x=20um  | 0     | ER at x=20um  |\n| 0.006 | ER at x=70um  | 0.006 | ER at x=70um  |\n|       | ER at x=120um |       | ER at x=120um |\n| 0.004 |               | 0.004 |               |\n| 0.002 |               | 0.002 |               |\n| 0     |               | 0     |               |\n|       | 1000          |       | 1000          |\n|       | 2000          |       | 2000          |\n|       | 3000          |       | 3000          |\n|       | 4000          |       | 4000          |\n|       | 5000          |       | 5000          |\n\npstim;j=0.0002 mM ℂ ms-1; (B), pstim;j=0.0003 mM ℂ ms-1; (C), pstim;j=0.00044 mM ℂ ms-1; (D), pstim;j=0.00045 mM ℂ ms-1: Notice that calcium wave only appears at injected location in Fig. A; whereas, in Fig. B two calcium waves appear; in Fig. C, still two waves show up but with higher magnitude (blue curve); in Fig. D, in PD model it eventually triggers two calcium waves (light green and brown curves).\n\nIn PD model, the threshold of stimulation strength of IP3 is even higher by pstim;j=0.00045 mM ℂ ms-1, as can be seen in Fig. 2C. Therefore, for such a low value of pstim;j=0.0001 mM ℂ ms-1, CICR cannot be triggered.\n\nNPE requires higher threshold of pstim;j than cable model in triggering CICR but lower threshold for wave propagation.\n\nCalcium wave travels farther with increasing IP3 stimulation in NPE in a higher magnitude. As can be seen in Fig. 3, the solid lines represent the calcium dynamics in dendrites; and the dashed lines with corresponding color represent the calcium dynamics in ER. By increasing the parameter of pstim;j from 0.0002 mM ℂ ms-1 (Fig. 3A red solid curve) to 0.0003 mM ℂ ms-1 (Fig. 3B blue curves), the calcium wave in NPE can travel from x=20um to x=70um, with a velocity of 50um ℂ sec-1 approximately. 50um ℂ 800ms-1 63um ℂ sec-1; however, CICR did not occur in PD model until pstim;j reaches 0.00045 mM ℂ ms-1. The CICR occurs in PD by around 150ms after NPE at x=20um (Fig. 3D light green curve); and this calcium wave travels to x=70um with lower magnitude and slower velocity (Fig. 3D brown curve). The reason why PD model requires higher IP3 stimulation is explained in Fig. 2. With pstim;j=0.00045 mM ℂ ms-1, the releasing current Jp (Fig. 2A red curve) is much higher than the pumping current Js (blue curve) and leaking current Jl (brown); while for pstim;j=0.00044 mM ℂ ms-1, the releasing current with Jp (Fig. 2B red) is lower than the pumping current with Jp &#x3C; (Js + Jl).\n\nFurthermore, there is much difference in the dynamics of n between pstim;j=0.00044 mM ℂ ms-1 and pstim;j=0.00045 mM ℂ ms-1 in PD model. With pstim;j=0.00045 mM ℂ ms-1, the quantity n increases to almost 0.8 (Fig. 2C magenta curve) and lasts for nearly 1 s, indicating the same trajectory of calcium dynamics in dendrite (Eq. (9b)); this strongly activated parameter n corresponds to the extremely large releasing current Jp (Fig. 2C) and wave has higher magnitude (Fig. 2A red curve), as indicated by Jp / m3n3h3 faster velocity of (Eq. (8a)). With the inhibiting effect from h (Fig. 2C green).\n\n\n\n---\n\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\n# Comparison of dynamics of each current of Jp; Js; Jl and m; n; h in PD model by different stimulation strength of IP3:\n\npstim;j = 0.00045 mM ℂ ms1 (A, C) and pstim;j = 0.00044 mM ℂ ms1 (B, D). Explain why there is no CICR in PD model by pstim;j = 0.00044 mM ℂ ms1 (B, D), but by pstim;j = 0.00045 mM ℂ ms1 it triggers CICR (A, C). “Jp; Js; Jl” imply the releasing current, pumping current and leak current, respectively.\n\n| 0.00004 | A | $0$      | 4x10-6 | B    | J0   | 0    |      |\n| ------- | - | -------- | ------ | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |\n| 0.00003 |   | 3×106    | 20     |      | 20   |      |      |\n| 0.00002 |   | $2×1066$ |        | 0    |      |      |      |\n| 0.00001 |   | 106      |        | 0    |      |      |      |\n| 0       |   | 0        | 1000   | 2000 | 3000 | 4000 | 5000 |\n\nHowever, with pstim;j=0.00044 mM ℂ ms1, the quantity n has been activated by the influx of calcium membrane current but did not stay (Fig. 2D magenta curve); instead n decreases sharply, which leads to the narrow dynamics of releasing current Jp (Fig. 2B red curve) and the fast decrease of pumping current Js (Fig. 2B blue curve).\n\n# CICR initiates earlier and calcium wave travels further in NPE than PD model\n\nFor stimulation by pstim;j = 0.0005 mM ℂ ms1, CICR can occur in both NPE and PD model, as can be seen in Fig. 4A and B C, 4D. It is noticeable that, in all these four cases, at locations of x = 20 µm, x = 70 µm and x = 120 µm, the initiation of CICR occurs later in PD model than it in NPE. For example, the CICR initiating in PD (Fig. 4A light green curve) is delayed from NPE (Fig. 4A red curve) at location of x = 20 µm; and CICR initiating in PD (Fig. 4A brown curve) is delayed from NPE (Fig. 4A blue curve) at location of x = 70 µm.\n\nMeanwhile, calcium wave can propagate further distance in NPE than PD model. As can be seen in Fig. 4C, calcium wave travels to location of x = 120 µm (Fig. 4C dark green curve) in NPE; whereas in PD model, this wave arrives at x = 120 µm only with very low magnitude (Fig. 4C magenta curve).\n\nIn NPE, calcium wave travels with much faster speed (71 µm ℂ sec-1: V:S: 100 µm ℂ sec-1) with stronger stimulation of IP3 in NPE (Fig. 4). With higher pstim;j, the second Ca2+ wave (Fig. 4B blue) appears earlier at x = 70 µm (Fig. 4A blue) by around 100 ms; subsequently, the velocity of Ca2+ wave (peak) is around Dx/DT = 50 µm ℂ 700 ms-1 = 71 µm ℂ sec-1 (Fig. 4A); while in Fig. 4B, with higher Pstim;j = 0.0005 mM ℂ ms-1, the velocity of calcium wave is around 100 µm ℂ sec-1.\n\nBy increasing stimulation of IP3, calcium wave can travel much further in both PD and NPE, as can be compared between Fig. 4B, C. By pstim;j = 0.001 mM ℂ ms-1, there is no calcium wave arriving at x = 120 µm (Fig. 4B); whereas, by pstim;j = 0.002 mM ℂ ms-1, calcium wave arrives at x = 120 µm (Fig. 4C dark green curve). Even for PD model, the calcium wave also shows up although with much lower magnitude (Fig. 4C magenta).\n\n1 3\n\n\n---\n\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\n# Fig. 4\n\nCICR behaviors in NPE and PD model by even stronger stimulation of IP3-1; (B)pstim;j = 0.001 mM ℂ ms-1; (C) pstim;j = 0.002 mM ℂ ms-1; (D) pstim;j = 0.01 mM ℂ ms-1. The solid curves indicate the dendritic calcium concentration, whereas the dashed curves indicate the calcium concentration in ER. For clarity, (B, C) and (D) use the same legends as in (A).</pstim;j>\n\n| 0.01         |               | B             | 0.008        | Ca x=20um | 0.008 |\n| ------------ | ------------- | ------------- | ------------ | --------- | ----- |\n|              | Ca x=70um     | Ca x=120um    | Ca x=20um PD | 0.006     |       |\n| 0.006        | Ca x=70um PD  | Ca x=120um PD | ER x=20um    | 0.004     |       |\n| ER x=70um    | 0.004         | ER x=120um    | ER x=20um PD | 0.002     |       |\n| ER x=70um PD | ER x=120um PD | 0.002         |              |           |       |\n\nIn addition, calcium wave travels in NPE by much faster speed in the early 50lm at around 125lm ℂ sec-1 (Fig. 4C blue) than it in the latter 50lm at around 77lm ℂ sec-1 (Fig. 4C dark green). For the first 50lm distance, the average velocity is around 50lm ℂ 400ms-1 = 125lm ℂ sec-1; while for 100lm distance, the average velocity is around 100lm ℂ 1300ms-1 = 77lm ℂ sec-1.\n\nBy even stronger IP3 stimulation of pstim;j = 0.01mM ℂ ms-1, the velocity of calcium wave increases from 77lm ℂ sec-1 (Fig. 4C dark green with pstim;j = 0.002mM ℂ ms-1) to 143lm ℂ sec-1 (Fig. 4D dark green, by pstim;j = 0.01mM ℂ ms-1).\n\nSecondly, the calcium wave lasts much longer by stronger IP3 stimulation. By higher Pstim;j = 0.001mM ℂ ms-1, calcium wave sustains longer time for around 2000 - 400 = 1600ms (Fig. 4B blue curve); whereas for Pstim;j = 0.0005mM ℂ ms-1 Ca2+ wave lasts for around 1600 - 500 = 1100ms (in Fig. 4A blue curve), which is 500ms shorter than the Fig. 4A blue curve.\n\nFor another instance, by pstim;j = 0.002mM ℂ ms-1, the first wave at x = 20lm vanishes at around 1800ms; whereas, by pstim;j = 0.01mM ℂ ms-1 (Fig. 4D red curve for NPE model and light green curve for PD model) the first wave at x = 20lm lasts for almost 2400ms. This effect is more obvious in the second calcium wave arriving at x = 70lm (blue curve for NPE and brown curve for PD model): by pstim;j = 0.002mM ℂ ms-1, the second calcium wave vanishes at around 2200ms (Fig. 4C blue curve); whereas, by stronger stimulation of IP3 pstim;j = 0.01mM ℂ ms-1, the second calcium wave vanishes later than 3000ms (Fig. 4D blue curve).\n\nThe third calcium wave arriving at x = 120lm shows high magnitude (dark green for NPE, magenta for PD in Fig. 4D), and the wave sustains more than 2400 - 600 = 1800ms; the second Ca2+ wave at x = 70lm (blue curve) sustains even longer, which is 3200 - 250 = 2950ms by pstim;j = 0.002mM ℂ ms-1 (Fig. 4C), and 2250 - 350 = 1900ms by pstim;j = 0.01mM ℂ ms-1 (Fig. 4D), the difference could be 1 s.\n\nOne would ask how CICR behaves in cable model in the parameter set of Fig. 4. As shown in Fig. 5, we find that cable model requires even higher threshold of IP3 to travel further. By pstim;j = 0.0005mM ℂ ms-1 and 0.001mM ℂ ms-1, CICR only occurs at the synaptic stimulation position of x = 20lm (Fig. 5A, red curve); However, there is no Ca2+ wave arriving at the position of x = 70lm (Fig. 5A and B blue and green curves).\n\n\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\n0.025 A Ca at x=20um 0.025 B\n\n0.02 Ca at x=70um Ca at x=120um 0.02\n\nER at x=20um ER at x=70um\n\n0.015 ER at x=120um 0.015\n\n0 0.01 00 0.01\n\n0.005 0.005\n\n0\n\n0.025 0 1000 2000 time(ms) 3000 4000 5000 0.025 0 1000 2000 time(ms) 3000 4000 5000\n\nc\n\n0.02 0.02\n\n0.015 0.015\n\n0 0.01 00 0.01\n\n0.005 0.005\n\n0\n\n1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000\n\ntime(ms) time(ms)\n\n# Fig. 5\n\nCICR behaviors in cable model for even stronger stimulation indicate the dendritic calcium concentration, whereas the dashed curves indicate the calcium concentration in ER. For clarity, (B, C) and (D) use the same legends as in (A).\n\nwe increase the level of IP3 to be pstim;j = 0.002mM ℂ ms-1, (with 2600ms in Fig. 4D red curve); in addition, the CICR eventually, there is the second calcium wave arriving at x = 70um (Fig. 5C blue curve) with much smaller magnitude than the first (Fig. 5C red curve). By pstim;j = 0.002mM ℂ ms-1, the calcium wave did not propagate to x = 120um until pstim;j = 0.01mM ℂ ms-1 (Fig. 5D dark green curve). In addition, the wave speed increases from 90 um ℂ sec-1 by pstim;j = 0.002mM ℂ ms-1 to 167 um ℂ sec-1 by pstim;j = 0.01mM ℂ ms-1:\n\nIt is noticeable that the duration of calcium wave by pstim;j = 0.01mM ℂ ms-1 (Fig. 5D red curve) is longer than that by pstim;j = 0.002mM ℂ ms-1 (Fig. 5C red curve). The second calcium wave with blue curve lasts much longer in Fig. 5D than in Fig. 5C by around 1000ms.\n\nIt is interesting to compare the CICR behavior in NPE (Fig. 4D) with cable model (Fig. 5D) for the same parameter set of pstim;j = 0.01mM ℂ ms-1. Firstly, the calcium level in cable model has much higher magnitude (around 0.005mM) than in NPE (around 0.002mM) at the injection location x = 20um. Again, this is due to the assumption of neglecting diffusion in cable model. Secondly, the duration of calcium wave in cable model (with 3700ms in Fig. 5D red curve) is much longer than the NPE.\n\n1 3\n\n---\n\n\n# Cognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\n# Fig. 6\n\nDifferential CICR behaviors for increasing the permeability of calcium channel PCa;M in NPE and PD model (A, B, C) and cable model (D, E, F) by pstim;j ¼ 0:002 mM ℂ ms−1 fixed. (A) and (D), PCa;M ¼ 1:0 × 10−7 lm ℂ ms−1; (B) and (E), PCa;M ¼ 5:0 × 10−7 lm ℂ ms−1; (C) and (F), PCa;M ¼ 1:0 × 10−6 lm ℂ ms−1. The solid curves indicate the dendritic calcium concentration, whereas the dashed curves indicate the calcium concentration in ER. Notice that CICR in PD model occurs in (B, C) but not in (A). For clarity, (C) uses the same legends as in Fig. (B); Fig. (F) uses the same legends as in Fig. (E).\n\nSame maximum permeability of calcium channel PCa;M results in higher stabilization level of calcium in cable model than in NPE.\n\nIn cable model, by increasing the value of PCa;M from 1:0 × 10−7 lm ℂ ms−1 (Fig. 6D) through 5:0 × 10−7 lm ℂ ms−1 (Fig. 6E) to 1:0 × 10−6 lm ℂ ms−1 (Fig. 6F), maximum calcium level in dendritic cytosol increases from 0.002 mM (Fig. 6D red solid curve) to 0.003 mM (Fig. 6E red solid curve) and 0.0045 mM (Fig. 6F red solid curve), respectively; and the stabilization level of calcium in the ER also increases from 0.011 mM (Fig. 6D red dashed curve) to 0.017 mM (Fig. 6E red dashed curve) and 0.025 mM (Fig. 6G red dashed curve), respectively.\n\nOn the contrary, in NPE as shown in Fig. 6A and B C, the calcium level in dendritic cytosol reaches maximum value of only 0.0017 mM, which is lower than that in cable model; and calcium level in the ER reaches only around 0.01 mM except the magenta dashed curves in Fig. 6B C. Therefore, with increasing permeability of calcium channel, cable model increases calcium level in both dendritic cytosol and ER; whereas it did not increase calcium level in dendritic cytosol in NPE.\n\n\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n# Fig. 7\n\nCalcium wave travels faster in NPE (A, C) than that in cable model (B, D). Parameter set: pstim;j ¼ 0:01mM ℂ ms−1, PCa;M ¼ 1:0 × 10−7lM ℂ ms−1: For clarity, (B) uses the same legends as in (A).\n\n| 0.01    | A    | 0.01         | B       |               |           |   |\n| ------- | ---- | ------------ | ------- | ------------- | --------- | - |\n| 0.008   |      | Ca at x=20um | 0.008   |               |           |   |\n|         |      | Ca at x=70um | 0.006   | ER at x=20um  |           |   |\n|         |      | ER at x=70um | 0       | ER at x=120um | 0.006     |   |\n| 0.004   |      | 0.004        |         |               |           |   |\n| 0.002   |      | 0.002        |         |               |           |   |\n|         | 0    |              | 0       |               |           |   |\n| 0.00014 | c    | time(ms)     | 0.00014 |               |           |   |\n|         |      | Jp at x=20um | 0.00012 | Jp at x=20um  | 0.00012   |   |\n|         |      | Jp at x=70um | 0.0001  | Jp at x=120um | 200.00008 |   |\n|         |      |              | 0.00008 |               | 0.00006   |   |\n|         |      |              | 0.00004 |               | 0.00002   |   |\n|         | 0    |              | 0       |               |           |   |\n| 0       | 1000 | 2000         | 3000    | 4000          | 5000      |   |\n| 0       | 1000 | 2000         | 3000    | 4000          | 5000      |   |\n\nIt indicates that even though with the same permeability of calcium channel PCa;M, it can trigger stronger CICR in cable model than in NPE. That is because the cable model neglects the concentration-induced pure diffusion thus it can withhold more calcium to trigger CICR. Meanwhile, the excessive calcium influx through membrane current is pumped by SERCA into ER and eventually it results in much higher stabilization level of ER in cable model (Fig. 6D and E F dashed red curves) than that in NPE.\n\nCalcium wave travels faster in NPE than in cable model by the same PCa;M dynamics of releasing current Jp at different locations of x ¼ 20um (red), x ¼ 70um (blue) and x ¼ 120um (green) for both NPE (Fig. 7C) and cable model (Fig. 7D); and it can be seen that the timing of releasing current Jp indicates the initiation of the process of CICR; and the timing of calcium wave arriving at position of x ¼ 120um is delayed in the cable model (green curve in Fig. 7B) from the NPE (green curve in Fig. 7A). At location of x ¼ 20um and the timing of Jp in cable model and NPE is different by approximately 40ms; the detailed illustration and explanation can be seen in Fig. 8.\n\nCalcium wave travels faster in NPE than it in cable model, as can be seen in Fig. 6 with pstim;j ¼ 0.002mM ℂ ms−1. It costs 400ms to travel from 20um to 70um in NPE (average speed 125um ℂ sec−1, as can be seen in Fig. 6A and B C); whereas, it costs about 600ms for traveling from 20um to 70um (average speed 83um ℂ sec−1) in cable model (Fig. 6D and E F blue curve). By increasing stimulation of IP3 with pstim;j ¼ 0.01mM ℂ ms−1, calcium wave travels with much faster velocity at 100um ℂ 600ms−1 ¼ 167um ℂ sec−1 in NPE (Fig. 7A) than it in cable model (Fig. 7B) with 100um ℂ 1100ms−1 ¼ 91um ℂ sec−1.\n\n1 3\n\n---\n\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\n# Fig. 8 Comparison of dynamics of each currents of ‘‘Jp; Js; Jl’’ and cable model (C, F).\n\nParameter set: pstim; j ¼ 0:01mM ℂ ms−1, m; n; h in each model. Explain why CICR at the stimulation location x ¼ 20μm did not occur in PD model B, E but occurs in NPE (A, D).\n\n‘‘Jp; Js; Jl’’ imply the releasing current, pumping current and leak current, respectively.\n\nCICR can be triggered in NPE and cable model but not in PD model by low permeability of calcium channel PCa;M.\n\nIn NPE, with low value of PCa;M ¼ 1:0 × 10−7 lm ℂ ms−1, CICR occurs at x ¼ 20μm (Fig. 6A red curve) and this calcium wave can travel to x ¼ 70μm; 120μm (Fig. 6A blue and green curves). However, at this parameter value, in PD model, CICR did not occur (Fig. 6A) until calcium permeability increases to PCa;M ¼ 5:0 × 10−7 lm ℂ ms−1 (Fig. 6B light green, brown, magenta curves). Why? The detailed analysis is presented in Fig. 8, where we plot the dynamics of Jp; Js; Jl at x ¼ 20μm. It can be seen that in NPE, the releasing Ca2+ current from ER into dendritic cytosol Jp (Fig. 8A red) is much higher than the pumping current Js (Fig. 8A magenta) and leaking current Jl (Fig. 8A blue); this is the same in cable model (Fig. 8C). However, in pure diffusion (PD) model, the pumping curve Js (Fig. 8B magenta curve) is much higher than the releasing curve Jp (Fig. 8B red curve); therefore, the calcium level in dendritic cytosol did increase, therefore, CICR did not occur in PD model.\n\nThe dynamics of m; n; h in the three models can help understand the CICR initiation in each model. As can be seen in Fig. 8D, E and F, the biggest difference lies in the dynamics of n (magenta curves), where in PD model.\n\n\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n# Fig. 9\n\nComparison of detailed calcium dynamics with timescales of calcium contribution in NPE and PD model, where, ‘‘pure’’ implies the pure diffusion current term, ‘‘ele’’ indicates the electro-diffusion current term and ‘‘mem’’ indicates the membrane current term. (A), calcium dynamics in NPE (red) and PD model (green); (B), each current of ‘‘Jp; Js; Jl’’ in NPE; (C), the each current of ‘‘Jp; Js; Jl’’ in PD model. Parameter set: pstim;j ¼ 0:01mM ℂ ms 1, PCa;M ¼ 1:0 10 7lm ℂ ms 1\n\n| 0.0007 | A               |          | $                | Ca at x=20um, ED | B  | at x=20um |    |    |    |\n| ------ | --------------- | -------- | ---------------- | ---------------- | -- | --------- | -- | -- | -- |\n| 0.0006 | Ca at x=20um PD | 0.00002  |                  |                  |    |           |    |    |    |\n| 0.0005 |                 | 20       | electrodiffusion |                  |    |           |    |    |    |\n| 0.0004 |                 | 0.000015 |                  |                  |    |           |    |    |    |\n|        | 0               |          |                  |                  |    |           |    |    |    |\n| 0.0003 |                 | 0.00001  |                  |                  |    |           |    |    |    |\n| 0.0002 |                 | 5x10^6   |                  |                  |    |           |    |    |    |\n| 0.0001 |                 | 0        |                  |                  |    |           |    |    |    |\n| 0      | 0               | 10       | 20               | 30               | 40 | 50        | 60 | 70 |    |\n|        |                 | 0        | 10               | 20               | 30 | 40        | 50 | 60 | 70 |\n\nMore interestingly, we have checked the contribution of calcium in NPE and PD model just before the initiation period of CICR, as is shown in Fig. 9. In a much shorter and finer time scale of 70ms, the dynamics of calcium in NPE (Fig. 9A red) and PD (Fig. 9A green) begins to divide around 10ms. The direct indication is that Jp [ Js + Jl in NPE (Fig. 9B); while in PD model, it is obvious that Jp &#x3C; Js + Jl (Fig. 9D). The contribution analysis between these two models can be seen in Fig. 9C, where the electro-diffusion current (magenta) stays around 0; and the membrane current in NPE (blue) and PD model (orange) are the same; however, the pure diffusion term (red) decays a little bit slower in NPE than in PD model (green), which indicates that this tiny difference makes CICR possible in NPE but not in PD model.\n\nWe wonder how CICR behavior differentiates between NPE and cable model for extremely large values of permeability PCa;M. By setting PCa;M ¼ 1:0 10 5 lm ℂ ms 1 and pstim;j ¼ 0:002mM ℂ ms 1, it can be seen that calcium level is extremely high in NPE model, which approaches 0.012mM at the synaptic input location of x ¼ 20lm (Fig. 10A red and light green curves);\n\nMore interestingly, in cable model this maximum calcium level (Fig. 10B red curve) reaches 0.03mM; which is almost more than doubled by comparing it in NPE. Again, the core reason is due to the assumption of ignoring the concentration gradient (thus no diffusion) in cable model, which constrains so much calcium from being diffused, and eventually accumulates to such a high level. The only way to evacuate dendritic calcium is the pumping process into ER by SERCA. Interestingly, the calcium in dendrite does not decay fast, which indicates that there is continuing releasing current from ER and that the ER pumping process is undergoing with the releasing process parallel (Fig. 10B\n\n1 3\n\n---\n\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\n# Calcium dynamics for extremely large value of PCa;M\n\nimplies the pure diffusion current term, ‘‘ele’’ indicates the electro-diffusion current term and ‘‘mem’’ indicates the membrane current term. pstim;j ¼ 0:002mM ℂ ms 1\n\n| 0.014           |                  | 0.08B            |               |              |\n| --------------- | ---------------- | ---------------- | ------------- | ------------ |\n| 0.012           |                  |                  |               |              |\n| 0.01            | 0.06             | Ca at x=20um     | Ca at x=70um  |              |\n| 0.008           | Ca at x=20um     | Ca at x=120um    | ER at x=20um  |              |\n|                 |                  |                  | Ca at x=70um  | ER at x=70um |\n| 0.006           | Ca at x=20um PD  |                  | ER at x=120um |              |\n| Ca at x=70um PD |                  |                  | ER at x=20um  |              |\n|                 | Ca at x=120um PD | ER at x=70um PD  |               |              |\n| 0.004           |                  |                  | ER at x=120um |              |\n| 0.002           | ER at x=20um PD  |                  |               |              |\n|                 | ER at x=70um PD  | ER at x=120um PD |               |              |\n| 0               |                  |                  |               |              |\n\nthis extremely high concentration of calcium needs more than 5 s to be pumped back to ER, as can be seen in Fig. 10B red dashed curve.\n\nOtherwise, the timing of CICR initiation and traveling velocity of calcium wave are not different from the cases with lower values of PCa;M; and SERCA pumps the excessive calcium back into ER itself (Fig. 10A dashed lines), which is not different from other cases.\n\nIt is noticeable that even though the magnitude of calcium level is very high by extremely large pstim;j ¼ 0:002mM ℂ ms 1 at x ¼ 20lm, the Ca2? wave has not arrived at x ¼ 120lm in cable model (Fig. 10B); whereas in NPE the calcium wave arrives at x ¼ 120lm (Fig. 10A dark green) at time around 1000ms. The reason is again due to the assumption of no diffusion in cable model.\n\ndiffusion of charged ion calcium in a cylinder dendrite with constricted spaces can be seen clearly in our simulation results. By modifying parameters of stimulation strength of IP3 pstim;j and the maximum permeability of calcium channel of PCa;M, our results demonstrate that characterizing dendritic membrane potential with electro-diffusion model of NPE and with no concentration gradient assumption of cable model leads to different CICR behaviors in aspects of CICR initiation, Ca2? wave propagation speed and sustaining time.\n\nBy gradually increasing the strength of IP3 stimulation of pstim;j, our model demonstrates the critical threshold of pstim;j to trigger CICR is lower in cable model than it in NPE and PD model. Our results provide the calcium wave initiation condition required by IP3 stimulation in cable model (pstim;j ¼ 0:0001mM ℂ ms 1), NPE (pstim;j ¼ 0:0002mM ℂ ms 1) and PD model (pstim;j ¼ 0:00045mM ℂ ms 1), respectively. For IP3 stimulation above pstim;j ¼ 0:00045mM ℂ ms 1, calcium initiation is delayed in PD model from that in NPE and the wave propagates with much shorter distances than it in NPE (Fig. 4). But in cable model, the calcium wave propagation is highly constrained, thus in cable model it requires even.\n\n# Conclusion\n\nWe have investigated the fundamental difference of calcium wave initiation and propagation between electro-diffusion model (NPE) and cable model as well as pure diffusion (PD) model. The significant impacts of electro-\n\n1 3\n\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n# Discussion\n\nThe calcium signal generated at the synapse could induce new gene expression at the soma, which is hundreds of microns away by the continuity between SER in the spines and SER of the dendrites (Berridge and Berridge 2002; Chanaday et al. 2022; De Schutter et al. 2008; Lopreore et al. 2019; McCormick and Huguenard 1992; Spacek et al. 1997; Stuart 2015) with branching points. Thus, the basic principles of the signal integration by dendritic trees come into play.\n\nRegarding traveling velocity of calcium wave, it heavily depends on the stimulation of IP3pstim;j, which leads to faster velocity with stronger stimulation of pstim;j. In NPE the stronger stimulation of IP3 leads to faster velocity, which increases from 50 µm·sec-1, 67 µm·sec-1, 100 µm·sec-1, 125 µm·sec-1 to 143 µm·sec-1. These velocities are comparable to the experimental evidence (Nadkarni et al. 2013), which on average was around 68 ± 22 µm·sec-1. In cable model, the average calcium wave travels slower than it in NPE by the same level of pstim;j. Calcium wave in PD model is always slower than it in NPE.\n\nCalcium wave sustaining duration increases with higher magnitude of pstim;j; for the same magnitude of pstim;j, the calcium wave duration is longer in cable model than it in NPE. Calcium wave with peak level of 0.0017 mM lasts around 1000 ms at x = 20 µm by pstim;j = 0.0003 to 0.00044 mM·ms-1; and it increases to 1600 ms by pstim;j = 0.001 mM·ms-1. The calcium wave at x = 70 µm lasts for 1100 ms by pstim;j = 0.0005 mM·ms-1 and 1600 ms by pstim;j = 0.001 mM·ms-1. These simulation results are comparable to experimental observations (Goto et al. 2022; Savic et al. 1998). The calcium sustaining time in our simulation can also reach about 3000 ms (Fig. 7AB blue curves), and this is comparable to experimental observations in Fig. 1E in the study (Li et al. 1994).\n\nThe timing of initiation of CICR in PD model is delayed than it in NPE, whereas the timing of calcium wave termination in PD model is earlier than it in NPE. The permeability of calcium channel PCa;M plays a key role in initiating CICR. Our results demonstrate that for lower value of calcium permeability PCa;M, in NPE and cable model it can both trigger CICR at the location of synaptic stimulation of x = 20 µm, but not in pure diffusion model (PD). For intermediate PCa;M, calcium wave can travel much longer distances with faster speed in NPE than it in cable model; for extremely large PCa;M, the calcium level is much higher in cable model but the distance that the wave can propagate is much shorter in cable model than it in NPE.\n\nTherefore, the questions as how far and how fast calcium can propagate are critically important, as well as its magnitude and sustaining time. Our comparison and analysis of calcium wave by NPE and cable model have significant potential applications. For instance, calcium wave propagation is critically important for the downstream signaling, one of which is the β-amyloid accumulation and Alzheimer’s diseases (Adeoye et al. 2022; Chanaday et al. 2022; Lagache et al. 2019; Pawar et al. 2022; Peercy and Peercy 2008; Taylor 2010); Others applications include the function impacts of precise calcium dynamics on dendritic information integration (Hille 1992; Jiang et al. 2012; Johnston and Miao-Sin 2001; Kim et al. 2022; LaFerla and LaFerla 2002; Narita et al. 1998; Stutzmann 2005), calcium homeostasis (Karagas et al. 2019; LaFerla and LaFerla 2002; Pozzo-Miller et al. 1997; Schulte et al. 2022; Sætra et al. 2020), synaptic plasticity (Bardo et al. 2006; Cascella et al. 2021; Hering et al. 2001; Koch et al. 1983; Martone et al. 1993; Nakamura et al. 1999; Pawar et al. 2022), synaptic clustering (Li et al. 1994) and synaptic synchronous and asynchronous release (Johnston et al. 1996; Karagas et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2007; Neymotin et al. 2013; Schulte et al. 2022; Winograd et al. 2008) all of which will influence the cognitive function, such as learning and memory (Carter et al. 2002; Jiang et al. 2012; Johnston et al. 1996; Khan and Khan 2022; Neymotin et al. 2015; Wen 2013; Yuste 2013).\n\nDendritic information integration with electro-diffusion of ions and morphology of ER\n\nExperimental observation (Goto et al. 2022) showed that the calcium “hot spot” mostly occurs at the dendritic branching point, where the IP3 receptors distribute as clusters in ER (Terasaki et al. 1994; Timofeeva 2003; Winograd et al. 2008). Therefore, the ER morphology with IP3 receptor distribution as well as the structural characteristics of dendrite will play important roles in regulating calcium signal processing. In the mechanistic perspective, our model provides a basic working scheme including the dynamics of electro-diffusion modeling of membrane potential and calcium wave initiation and propagation.\n\n1301\n\n---\n\n\n# Cognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\ndown to the basic electro-diffusion process of charged ions in regulating both membrane potential dynamics and CICR.\n\nIn our work, we consider only one synaptic input at a location to compare CICR behaviors in electro-diffusion modeling of membrane potential models. Yet for physiologically realistic conditions, complicated patterns of synaptic signals with various frequencies needs to be carried out for signal processing (Blackwell and Blackwell 2013; Ermentrout et al. 1996; Hille 1992; Johnston and Miao-Sin 2001; Lee et al. 2016; Nakamura et al. 2002); meanwhile there are multiple locations of the synaptic stimulation distributed along the dendrite (Hong et al. 2007; Jiang et al. 2012; Pozzo-Miller et al. 1997; Ross et al. 2005; Watanabe et al. 2006), the calcium regeneration with CICR would definitely have much rich dynamics (Fitzpatrick et al. 2009; Khan and Khan 2022; LaFerla and LaFerla 2002; Larkum et al. 2003; Lopreore et al. 2008; Padamsey et al. 2019); especially with electro-diffusion modeling of membrane potential calculations and simplification by cable model, the result of signal processing could be completely different.\n\n# Importance of downstream signaling process by precise calcium dynamics\n\nThe membrane potential determined by the ion electro-diffusion by Nernst–Planck equations may imply essential and robust changes in the synaptic transmission and dendritic information integration (Kaeser and Regehr 2014; Koch et al. 1983; Larkum et al. 2003; Lu et al. 2000; Ross and Ross 2012; Singer et al. 2009; Stutzmann 2005). Especially, for even more complicated structure of dendrites, the tiny deviation between cable model and NPE may be amplified to have completely different results in calcium regenerative dynamics and subsequently calcium-dependent downstream signaling. Therefore, studies have to re-evaluate the critical role of electro-diffusion in determining the delicate behavior during signal transduction in delicate subcellular processes.\n\nFor calcium channel types, there are P/Q, N and L types, each of them fits to the functional need of synapse or dendritic processing (Hong et al. 2007; Padamsey et al. 2019). Therefore, the sensitive dependence on membrane potential becomes more important. Our model addresses the essential role of electro-diffusion in determining the membrane potential, which demonstrates that the tiny difference between NPE and cable model in the influx of calcium can subsequently result in different CICR and calcium wave propagation.\n\n# Synaptic transmission and asynchronous release require precise and accurate calcium dynamics\n\nThe role of endoplasmic reticulum as calcium inner store in the plasticity of central neurons has been reported previously (Bardo et al. 2006; de Juan-Sanz et al. 2017). More and more experimental observations have shown the important role of presynaptic store in regulating synaptic short term plasticity (Nakamura et al. 1999); it has assessed the role of CICR in presynaptic plasticity at excitatory central synapses (Cascella et al. 2021) and in rat CA1 pyramidal neurons (Inoue et al. 2001). In addition, it observed in CNS nerve terminal that axonal endoplasmic reticulum calcium content controls release probability in CNS nerve terminals (Hering et al. 2001).\n\nRecent progress in asynchronous release addressed the important role of calcium store. It is reported an enhancement of asynchronous release from fast-spiking interneuron in human and rat epileptic neocortex (Johnston et al. 1996) which indicates that calcium inner store might mediate the asynchronous release; besides, inhibitory transmission may also be mediated by asynchronous release (Lu et al. 2007).\n\nMore interestingly, experiments observed that synchronous release and asynchronous release of synaptic transmission utilize different calcium store (Winograd et al. 2008), and studies reported a CICR mechanism involved in asynchronous exocytosis at frog motor nerve terminals (Neymotin et al. 2013). The role of calcium regenerative process of CICR in regulating synaptic synchronous and asynchronous transmission will be an important question to investigate. In addition, how CICR of calcium propagation contributes to the neuronal network activity through synaptic transmission would be an interesting and important project in the future.\n\n# Acknowledgements\n\nThe research is supported by Science and Technology Innovation 2030 major projects (No. 2021ZD0203803), National Key R&#x26;D Program of China (No. 2019 YFA0709503), and China Scholarship Council, Beijing high-level discipline construction project-cognitive neuroscience, and China National Science Foundation (No.31601145). The Author thanks Dr. Alexander Dimitrov very much for his deep discussions.\n\n# Declarations\n\nConflict of interest The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work.\n\n# References\n\nAdeoye T, Shah SI, Demuro A, Rabson DA, Ullah G (2022) Upregulated Ca2? release from the endoplasmic reticulum leads to impaired presynaptic function in familial Alzheimer’s disease. Cells 11(14):2167. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11142167\n\n\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\nAllbritton NL, Meyer T, Stryer L (1992) Range of messenger action of calcium ion and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate. Science 258(5089):1812–5. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1465619\n\nAtri A, Amundson J, Clapham D, Sneyd J (1993) A single-pool model for intracellular calcium oscillations and waves in the Xenopus Laevis Oocyte. Biophys J 65(4):1727–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3495(93)81191-3\n\nBardo S, Cavazzini MG, Emptage N (2006) The role of the endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ store in the plasticity of central neurons. Trends Pharmacol Sci 27(2):78–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2005.12.008\n\nBerridge MJ (1998) Neuronal calcium signaling. Neuron 21:13–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80510-3\n\nBerridge MJ (2002) The endoplasmic reticulum: a multifunctional signaling organelle. Cell Calcium 32(5–6):235–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0143416002001823\n\nBianchi R, Young SR, Wong RK (1999) Group I mGluR activation causes voltage-dependent and -independent Ca2+ rises in hippocampal pyramidal cells. J Neurophysiol 81(6):2903–13. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1999.81.6.2903\n\nBlackwell KT (2013) Approaches and tools for modeling signaling pathways and calcium dynamics in neurons. J Neurosci Methods 220(2):131–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.05.008\n\nBrini M, Calı T, Ottolini D, Carafoli E (2014) Neuronal calcium signaling: function and dysfunction. Cell Mol Life Sci 71(15):2787–2814. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-013-1550-7\n\nCarter AG, Vogt KE, Foster KA, Regehr WG (2002) Assessing the role of calcium-induced calcium release in short-term presynaptic plasticity at excitatory central synapses. J Neurosci 22(1):21–8. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-01-00021\n\nCascella R, Cecchi C (2021) Calcium dyshomeostasis in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. Int J Mol Sci 22(9):4914. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22094914\n\nChanaday NL, Kavalali ET (2022) Role of the endoplasmic reticulum in synaptic transmission. Curr Opin Neurobiol 73\n\nCollin T, Marty A, Llano I (2005) Presynaptic calcium stores and synaptic transmission. Curr Opin Neurobiol 15(3):275–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2005.05.003\n\nde Juan-Sanz J, Holt GT, Schreiter ER, de Juan F, Kim DS (2017) Ryan TA Axonal endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ content controls release probability in CNS nerve terminals. Neuron 93(4):867-881.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.01.010\n\nDe Schutter E (2008) Why are computational neuroscience and systems biology so separate? PLoS Comput Biol 4(5)\n\nDe Schutter E, Smolen P (1998) Calcium dynamics in large neuronal models. In: Koch C, Segev I (eds) Methods in neuronal modeling: from ions to networks. MIT Press, Cambridge\n\nErmentrout B, Rinzel J (1996) Reflected waves in an inhomogeneous excitable medium. SIAM J Appl Math 56:1107–1128\n\nFitzpatrick JS, Hagenston AM, Hertle DN, Gipson KE, Bertetto-D’Angelo L, Yeckel MF (2009) Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-mediated Ca2+ waves in pyramidal neuron dendrites propagate through hot spots and cold spots. J Physiol 587(Pt 7):1439–59. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2009.168930\n\nGoto JI, Fujii S, Fujiwara H, Mikoshiba K, Yamazaki Y (2022) Synaptic plasticity in hippocampal CA1 neurons of mice lacking inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-binding protein released with IP3 (IRBIT). Learn Mem 29:110–119. https://doi.org/10.1101/lm.053542.121\n\nHering H, Sheng M (2001) Dendritic spines: structure, dynamics and regulation. Nat Rev Neurosci 2:880–888. https://doi.org/10.1038/35104061\n\nHille B (1992) Ionic channels in excitable membranes. 2nd edn.; Sinauer\n\nHong M, Ross WN (2007) Priming of intracellular calcium stores in rat CA1 pyramidal neurons. J Physiol 584(Pt 1):75–87. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2007.137661\n\nInoue T, Lin X, Kohlmeier KA, Orr HT, Zoghbi HY, Ross WN (2001) Calcium dynamics and electrophysiological properties of cerebellar Purkinje cells in SCA1 transgenic mice. J Neurophysiol 85(4):1750–60. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.2001.85.4.1750\n\nJaffe DB, Brown TH (1994) Metabotropic glutamate receptor activation induces calcium waves within hippocampal dendrites. J Neurophysiol 72(1):471–4. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1994.72.1.471\n\nJiang M, Zhu J, Liu Y, Yang M, Tian C, Jiang S, Wang Y, Guo H, Wang K, Shu Y (2012) Enhancement of asynchronous release from fast-spiking interneuron in human and rat epileptic neocortex. PLoS Biol 10(5):e1001324. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001324 (Epub 2012 May 8. PMID: 22589699; PMCID: PMC3348166)\n\nJohnston D, Miao-Sin WuS (2001) Foundations of cellular neurophysiology. The MIT Press\n\nJohnston D, Magee JC, Colbert CM, Cristie BR (1996) Active properties of neuronal dendrites. Annu Rev Neurosci 19:165–86. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ne.19.030196.001121\n\nKaeser PS, Regehr WG (2014) Molecular mechanisms for synchronous, asynchronous, and spontaneous neurotransmitter release. Annu Rev Physiol 76:333–363. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physiol-021113-170338 (Epub 2013 Nov 21. PMID: 24274737; PMCID: PMC4503208)\n\nKaragas NE, Venkatachalam K (2019) Roles for the endoplasmic reticulum in regulation of neuronal calcium homeostasis. Cells. 10:1232. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells8101232\n\nKay AR, Wong RK (1987) Calcium current activation kinetics in isolated pyramidal neurones of the Ca1 region of the mature guinea-pig hippocampus. J Physiol 392:603–616. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1987.sp016799\n\nKhan S (2022) Endoplasmic reticulum in metaplasticity: from information processing to synaptic proteostasis. Mol Neurobiol 59(9):5630–5655. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-022-02916-1\n\nKim TH (2022) Schnitzer MJ Fluorescence imaging of large-scale neural ensemble dynamics. Cell. 185(1):9–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.12.007\n\nKirk LM, Harris KM, (2016) Dendritic spines In: eLS J, Wiley, Sons, Ltd (eds). https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470015902.a0000093.pub3\n\nKoch C, Poggio T, Torre V (1983) Nonlinear interactions in a dendritic tree: localization, timing, and role in information processing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 80(9):2799–2802. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.80.9.2799\n\nLaFerla FM (2002) Calcium dyshomeostasis and intracellular signalling in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 3(11):862–72. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn960\n\nLagache T, Jayant K, Yuste R (2019) Electrodiffusion models of synaptic potentials in dendritic spines. J Comput Neurosci 47(1):77–89. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10827-019-00725-5\n\nLarkum ME, Watanabe S, Nakamura T, Lasser-Ross N, Ross WN (2003) Synaptically activated Ca2+ waves in layer 2/3 and layer 5 rat neocortical pyramidal neurons. J Physiol 549(Pt 2):471–88. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2002.037614\n\nLee KF, Soares C, Thivierge JP (2016) Beque JC correlated synaptic inputs drive dendritic calcium amplification and cooperative plasticity during clustered synapse development. Neuron 89(4):784–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.01.012\n\nLi YX, Rinzel J (1994) Equations for InsP3 receptor-mediated [Ca2+] oscillations derived from a detailed kinetic model: a Hodgkin-Huxley like formalism. J Theor Biol 166(4):461–73. https://doi.org/10.1006/jtbi.1994.1041\n\n1303\n\n---\n\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\n\nLopreore CL, Bartol TM, Coggan JS, Keller DX, Sosinsky GE, Ellisman MH, Sejnowski TJ (2008) Computational modeling of three-dimensional electrodiffusion in biological systems: application to the node of Ranvier. Biophys J 95(6):2624–35. https://doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.108.132167\n\nLu T, Trussell LO (2000) Inhibitory transmission mediated by asynchronous transmitter release. Neuron 26(3):683–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(00)81204-0\n\nLu B, Zhou YC, Huber GA, Bond SD, Holst MJ, McCammon JA (2007) Electrodiffusion: a continuum modeling framework for biomolecular systems with realistic spatiotemporal resolution. J Chem Phys. 127(13)\n\nMahajan G, Nadkarni S (2019) Intracellular calcium stores mediate metaplasticity at hippocampal dendritic spines. J Physiol. 597(13):3473–3502. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP277726\n\nMartone ME, Zhang Y, Simpliciano VM, Carragher BO, Ellisman MH (1993) Three-dimensional visualization of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum in Purkinje cell dendrites. J Neurosci 13(11):4636–4646. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.13-11-04636.1993\n\nMcCormick DA, Huguenard JR (1992) Oct;68(4):1384 – 400 A model of the electrophysiological properties of thalamocortical relay neurons. J Neurophysiol. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1992.68.4.1384. PMID: 1331356\n\nMori Y, Liu C, Eisenberg RS (2011) A model of electrodiffusion and osmotic water flow and its energetic structure. Physica D 240:1835–1852. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2011.08.010. (ISSN 0167–2789)\n\nNadkarni S, Sejnowski T, Bartol T, Thomas B, Charles S, Herbert L, Kristen H, Edward E (2013) Effects of presynaptic calcium store on short-term plasticity. Biophys J 102(3):670a\n\nNakamura T, Barbara JG, Nakamura K, Ross WN (1999) Synergistic release of Ca2 ? from IP3-sensitive stores evoked by synaptic activation of mGluRs paired with backpropagating action potentials. Neuron 24(3):727–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(00)81125-3\n\nNakamura T, Lasser-Ross N, Nakamura K, Ross WN (2002) Spatial segregation and interaction of calcium signalling mechanisms in rat hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. J Physiol. 543(Pt 2):465–80. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2002.020362\n\nNarita K, Akita T, Osanai M, Shirasaki T, Kijima H, Kuba K (1998) A Ca2?-induced Ca2 ? release mechanism involved in asynchronous exocytosis at frog motor nerve terminals. J Gen Physiol 112(5):593–609\n\nNeymotin SA, Hilscher MM, Moulin TC, Skolnick Y, Lazarewicz MT, Lytton WW (2013) Ih tunes theta/gamma oscillations and cross-frequency coupling in an in silico CA3 model. PLoS One 8(10)\n\nNeymotin SA, McDougal RA, Sherif MA, Fall CP, Hines ML, Lytton WW (2015) Neuronal calcium wave propagation varies with changes in endoplasmic reticulum parameters: a computer model. Neural Comput 27(4):898–924. https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00712\n\nPadamsey Z, Foster WJ, Emptage NJ (2019) Intracellular Ca2? release and synaptic plasticity: a tale of many stores. Neuroscientist 25(3):208–226. https://doi.org/10.1177/1073858418785334\n\nPawar A, Pardasani KR (2022) Effect of disturbances in neuronal calcium and IP3 dynamics on b-amyloid production and degradation. Cogn Neurodyn. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11571-022-09815-0\n\nPawar A, Pardasani KR (2022) Study of disorders in regulatory spatiotemporal neurodynamics of calcium and nitric oxide. Cogn Neurodyn. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11571-022-09902-2\n\nPawar A, Pardasani KR (2022) Effects of disorders in interdependent calcium and IP3 dynamics on nitric oxide production in a neuron cell. Eur Phys J Plus 137:543. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjp/s13360-022-02743-2\n\nPawar A, Pardasani KR (2022) Simulation of disturbances in interdependent calcium and b-amyloid dynamics in the nerve cell. Eur Phys J Plus 137:960. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjp/s13360-022-03164-x\n\nPeercy BE (2008) Initiation and propagation of a neuronal intracellular calcium wave. J Comput Neurosci 25(2):334–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10827-008-0082-x\n\nPozzo Miller LD, Petrozzino JJ, Golarai G, Connor JA (1996) Ca2 ? release from intracellular stores induced by afferent stimulation of CA3 pyramidal neurons in hippocampal slices. J Neurophysiol 76(1):554–62. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1996.76.1.554\n\nPozzo-Miller LD, Pivovarova NB, Leapman RD, Buchanan RA, Reese TS, Andrews SB (1997) Activity-dependent calcium sequestration in dendrites of hippocampal neurons in brain slices. J Neurosci. 17(22):8729–38. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-22-08729.1997\n\nQian N, Sejnowski TJ (1989) An electro-diffusion model for computing membrane potentials and ionic concentrations in branching dendrites, spines and axons. Biol Cybern 62:1–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00217656\n\nRoss WN (2012) Understanding calcium waves and sparks in central neurons. Nat Rev Neurosci 13(3):157–68. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3168\n\nRoss WN, Nakamura T, Watanabe S, Larkum M, Lasser-Ross N (2005) Synaptically activated ca2 ? release from internal stores in CNS neurons. Cell Mol Neurobiol 25(2):283–95. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10571-005-3060-0\n\nSætra MJ, Einevoll GT, Halnes G (2020) An electrodiffusive, ion conserving Pinsky-Rinzel model with homeostatic mechanisms. PLoS Comput Biol 16(4)\n\nSavic N, Sciancalepore M (1998) Intracellular calcium stores modulate miniature GABA-mediated synaptic currents in neonatal rat hippocampal neurons. Eur J Neurosci 10(11):3379–86. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1460-9568.1998.00342.x\n\nSchulte A, Blum R (2022) Shaped by leaky ER: homeostatic Ca2? fluxes. Front Physiol 13\n\nSinger A, Norbury J (2009) A Poisson-Nernst-Planck model for biological ion channels - an asymptotic analysis in a three-dimensional narrow funnel. SIAM J Appl Math 70(3):949–968. https://doi.org/10.1137/070687037\n\nSolbra A, Bergersen AW, van den Brink J, Malthe-Sørenssen A, Einevoll GT, Halnes G (2018) A Kirchhoff-Nernst-Planck framework for modeling large scale extracellular electrodiffusion surrounding morphologically detailed neurons. PLoS Comput Biol 14(10)\n\nSolovyova N, Veselovsky N, Toescu EC, Verkhratsky A (2002) Ca(2?) dynamics in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum in sensory neurons: direct visualization of Ca(2?)-induced Ca(2?) release triggered by physiological Ca(2?) entry. EMBO J 21(4):622–30. https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/21.4.622\n\nSpacek J, Harris KM (1997) Three-dimensional organization of smooth endoplasmic reticulum in hippocampal CA1 dendrites and dendritic spines of the immature and mature rat. J Neurosci 17(1):190–203. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-01-00190.1997\n\nStuart GJ, Spruston N (2015 Dec) Dendritic integration: 60 years of progress. Nat Neurosci 18(12):1713–1721. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4157 Epub 2015 Nov 25. PMID: 26605882\n\nStutzmann GE (2005) Apr;11(2):110-5 Calcium dysregulation, IP3 signaling, and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscientist. https://doi.org/10.1177/1073858404270899. PMID: 15746379\n\nTaylor CW, Tovey SC (2010 Dec) IP(3) receptors: toward understanding their activation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2(12):a004010. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a004010\n\n\n\n---\n\nCognitive Neurodynamics (2024) 18:1285–1305\nWinograd M, Destexhe A, Sanchez-Vives MV, S A (2008) Hyper-polarization-activated graded persistent activity in the prefrontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U. May 20;105(20):7298 – 303. doi: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0800360105. Epub 2008 May 12. PMID: 20980441; PMCID: PMC2982166\n\nTerasaki M, Slater NT, Fein A, Schmidek A, Reese TS (1994) Continuous network of endoplasmic reticulum in cerebellar Purkinje neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. Aug 2;91(16):7510-4. doi: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.16.7510. PMID: 7519781; PMCID: PMC44431\n\nTimofeeva Y, Coombes S (2003 Sep) Wave bifurcation and propagation failure in a model of ca(2+) release. J Math Biol 47(3):249–269. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00285-003-0205-y. Epub 2003 May 15. PMID: 12955459\n\nWatanabe S, Hong M, Lasser-Ross N, Ross WN (2006) Modulation of calcium wave propagation in the dendrites and to the soma of rat hippocampal pyramidal neurons. J Physiol. Sep 1;575(Pt 2):455 – 68. doi: https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2006.114231. Epub 2006 Jun 29. PMID: 16809362; PMCID: PMC1819440\n\nWen H, Hubbard JM, Rakela B, Linhoff MW, Mandel G, Brehm P Synchronous and asynchronous modes of synaptic transmission utilize different calcium sources. Elife. 2013 Dec 24;2:e01206. doi: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01206. PMID: 24368731; PMCID: PMC3869123.\n\nPublisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.","job_metadata":{"credits_used":0,"job_credits_usage":0,"job_pages":0,"job_auto_mode_triggered_pages":0,"job_is_cache_hit":true}}