{"markdown":"\n# Article\n\n# Glutamate Receptor Modulation Is Restricted to Synaptic Microdomains\n\n# Authors\n\nGyorgy Lur, Michael J. Higley\n\n# Correspondence\n\nm.higley@yale.edu\n\n# In Brief\n\nLur and Higley demonstrate that norepinephrine and GABA differentially regulate AMPAR-mediated currents and NMDAR-mediated Ca2+ influx, respectively. These distinct actions are driven by downregulation of PKA signaling and occur due to the existence of functional microdomains that are maintained by receptor co-localization and the actions of RGS4.\n\n# Highlights\n\n- Adrenergic a2Rs reduce AMPAR currents while GABABRs reduce NMDAR Ca2+ influx\n- Adrenergic and GABAergic control of glutamate receptors occurs via inhibition of PKA\n- Modulatory microdomains are established by co-localization and the actions of RGS4\n\nLur &#x26; Higley, 2015, Cell Reports 12, 326–334\n\nJuly 14, 2015 ª2015 The Authors\n\nhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.029\n\n---\n\n\n# Cell Reports\n\n# Article\n\n# Glutamate Receptor Modulation Is Restricted to Synaptic Microdomains\n\nGyorgy Lur¹ and Michael J. Higley1,*\n\n1Department of Neurobiology, Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA\n\n*Correspondence: m.higley@yale.edu\n\nhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.029\n\nThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).\n\n# SUMMARY\n\nA diverse array of neuromodulators governs cellular function in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) via the activation of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). However, these functionally diverse signals are carried and amplified by a relatively small assortment of intracellular second messengers. Here, we examine whether two distinct Gai-coupled neuromodulators (norepinephrine and GABA) act as redundant regulators of glutamatergic synaptic transmission. Our results reveal that, within single dendritic spines of layer 5 pyramidal neurons, alpha-2 adrenergic receptors (a2Rs) selectively inhibit excitatory transmission mediated by AMPA-type glutamate receptors, while type B GABA receptors (GABABRs) inhibit NMDA-type receptors. We show that both modulators act via the downregulation of cAMP and PKA. However, by restricting the lifetime of active Gai, RGS4 promotes the independent control of these two distinct target proteins. Our findings highlight a mechanism by which neuromodulatory microdomains can be established in subcellular compartments such as dendritic spines.\n\n# INTRODUCTION\n\nNeuromodulation via G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) provides a ubiquitous mechanism for regulating neuronal activity in the mammalian brain. In contrast to classical neurotransmitters that directly excite or inhibit postsynaptic neurons, neuromodulators alter neuronal excitability and modify synaptic transmission (Destexhe et al., 1994; Dismukes, 1979). Interestingly, there is a paradoxical mismatch between the diversity of modulatory ligands and the relative paucity of GPCR-linked second messenger systems such as adenylate cyclase and phospholipase C. The mobility of dissociated G protein subunits and downstream molecules such as calcium (Ca2+), cAMP, and inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate should further reduce the cellular capacity for segregated signaling pathways. Nevertheless, there is evidence for the functional compartmentalization of soluble messengers into independent microdomains, which could contribute to neuromodulatory specificity. For example, rapid intracellular buffering coupled with potent extrusion mechanisms spatially restricts Ca2+ within presynaptic terminals and dendritic spines (Higley and Sabatini, 2008; Lisman et al., 2007; Yuste et al., 2000). However, the potential for mobile, non-ionic signaling molecules to be isolated within synaptic microdomains is largely unknown.\n\nIn the prefrontal cortex (PFC), neuromodulation by both norepinephrine (NE) and gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA) regulates higher cognitive functions, including attention and short-term “working” memory (Gamo and Arnsten, 2011; Kesner and Churchwell, 2011). Altered levels of NE and GABA are also linked to neuropsychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia, attention deficit, and addiction (Arnsten, 2011; Stan and Lewis, 2012; Tyacke et al., 2010). Experimental evidence suggests that both type 2 alpha adrenergic receptors (a2Rs) and type B GABA receptors (GABABRs) modulate excitatory glutamatergic signaling in the PFC (Chalifoux and Carter, 2010; Ji et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2006). Additionally, ultrastructural studies have localized both a2Rs and GABABRs to dendritic spines, the location of synaptic glutamate receptors (Kulik et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2007). Both a2Rs and GABABRs are GPCRs coupled to the G protein subunit Gai, whose activation leads to the inhibition of adenylate cyclase and decreased production of cAMP (Knight and Bowery, 1996; Summers and McMartin, 1993). The subsequent reduction in cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) activity provides a potential mechanism for the control of both AMPA- and NMDA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs and NMDARs, respectively) (Chen et al., 2008; Esteban et al., 2003; Raymond et al., 1994). These observations raise the question of whether a2Rs and GABABRs act as redundant modulators of prefrontal synaptic transmission.\n\nTo test this hypothesis, we combined electrophysiological recordings and two-photon imaging of PFC pyramidal neurons with optical stimulation of excitatory glutamatergic synapses using focal glutamate uncaging (Carter and Sabatini, 2004). Our results reveal the surprising observation that activating a2Rs reduces AMPAR-mediated responses, whereas activating GABABRs decreases NMDAR-mediated responses. Notably, both modulatory pathways utilize Gai-mediated downregulation of cAMP and PKA signaling, and this dissociation occurs despite functional evidence that both a2Rs and GABABRs are located in the same dendritic spines. We further find that inhibiting the GTPase activating protein RGS4 eliminates the selective compartmentalization of adrenergic and GABAergic actions. Thus, RGS4 promotes the independent control of two distinct target proteins.\n\n---\n\n\n# Figure 1. a2Rs and GABABRs Differentially Modulate AMPA- and NMDA-type Glutamate Receptors\n\n# (A)\n\n(i) Two-photon image of a layer 5 pyramidal neuron filled with Alexa Fluor 594 dye via the patch pipette. White box indicates the basal dendritic arbor. (ii) Close-up image of a dendritic spine. Asterisk shows the location of glutamate uncaging. (iii) Fluorescence collected in a line scan indicated on (ii) by dashed line. Arrowhead shows the time point of glutamate uncaging.\n\n# (B)\n\n(i) Mean AMPAR-mediated uEPSCs in control (black) and guanfacine (red) ±SEM (shaded areas). (ii) AMPAR-mediated uEPSCs in control (black) and baclofen (blue) ±SEM (shaded areas).\n\n|                      | Control             | Guanfacine          | Baclofen            |\n| -------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |\n| uEPSC Amplitude (pA) | 17.2 ± 0.9 (n = 32) | 8.8 ± 0.7 (n = 32)  | 16.9 ± 1.0 (n = 26) |\n|                      |                     | 16.9 ± 1.1 (n = 30) |                     |\n\n# (C)\n\n(i) 2PLU-evoked NMDAR-currents and (ii) Ca2+ transients in control (black) and guanfacine (red), mean (solid lines) ±SEM (shaded areas). (Cii) NMDAR-mediated uEPSCs and (Dii) Ca2+ transients in control (black) and baclofen (blue) ±SEM (shaded areas).\n\n|                      | Control              | Guanfacine           | Baclofen            |\n| -------------------- | -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------- |\n| uEPSC Amplitude (pA) | 24.1 ± 3.1 (n = 38)  | 26.6 ± 2.9 (n = 32)  | 24.3 ± 2.5          |\n| DCa2+                | 0.71 ± 0.035 DG/Gsat | 0.64 ± 0.034 DG/Gsat | 0.68 ± 0.03 DG/Gsat |\n|                      |                      | 0.49 ± 0.02 DG/Gsat  |                     |\n\n*p &#x3C; 0.05, unpaired t test.\n\n50 μm GF target proteins by eliminating crosstalk between signaling pathways in dendritic spines. Our results highlight a novel mechanism by which biochemical multiplexing can occur in subcellular microdomains.\n\n# RESULTS\n\n# Distinct Gai-Coupled Agonists Differentially Modulate Postsynaptic Glutamate Receptors\n\nWe investigated whether two distinct neuromodulators that target the same biochemical pathway produce similar changes in glutamatergic transmission. To identify the actions of a2Rs and GABABRs on postsynaptic glutamatergic signaling, we used two-photon laser uncaging of glutamate (2PLU) to stimulate single excitatory synapses on prefrontal L5 pyramidal neurons while recording excitatory postsynaptic currents (uEPSCs) and imaging postsynaptic calcium (Ca2+) signals. Uncaging power was individually calibrated for spines on the proximal basal dendrites (&#x3C;100 mm from the soma) to emulate endogenous glutamate release from a single presynaptic terminal (Figures 1A and S1).\n\nFirst, we pharmacologically isolated AMPAR-mediated responses and recorded synaptic currents (Figure 1B; see Experimental Procedures). Bath application of the a2R agonist guanfacine (40 mM) reduced uEPSCs from 17.2 ± 0.9 pA (n = 32 spines) to 8.8 ± 0.7 pA (n = 32 spines, p &#x3C; 0.0001, unpaired t test). In contrast, the GABABR agonist baclofen (5 mM) had no effect on AMPAR-mediated uEPSC amplitude (16.9 ± 1.0 pA, n = 26 spines versus 16.9 ± 1.1 pA, n = 30 spines, p = 0.97).\n\nWe then performed converse experiments in which we isolated NMDAR-mediated responses and recorded both uEPSCs and DCa2+ in the spine head (Figures 1C and 1D; see Supplemental Experimental Procedures). Under these conditions, 2PLU-evoked DCa2+ is mediated by influx through NMDARs (Figure S2). Guanfacine had no effect on either uEPSC amplitude (24.1 ± 3.1 pA, n = 38 spines, versus 26.6 ± 2.9 pA, n = 32 spines, p = 0.56) or DCa2+ (0.71 ± 0.035 DG/Gsat versus 0.64 ± 0.034 DG/Gsat, p = 0.17). In contrast, baclofen significantly reduced NMDAR-mediated DCa2+ in the spine head (0.68 ± 0.03 DG/Gsat, n = 33 spines versus 0.49 ± 0.02 DG/Gsat, n = 35 spines, p &#x3C; 0.0001) but did not alter uEPSCs (24.3 ± 2.5 pA, versus 23.2 ± 2.0 pA, p = 0.73). Thus, our results demonstrate that a2Rs and GABABRs selectively modulate postsynaptic AMPARs and NMDARs, respectively.\n\n# Modulation of AMPARs and NMDARs Is Mediated by Downregulation of PKA\n\nOne explanation for our results is that adrenergic and GABAergic modulation of glutamate receptors occurs via distinct biochemical signaling pathways. We therefore isolated AMPAR-mediated synaptic responses and tested the ability of H89 (10 mM), a selective blocker of cAMP-dependent kinase (PKA), to mimic and occlude the actions of guanfacine. In the presence of H89, uEPSC amplitude was 12.4 ± 1.3 pA (n = 30 spines, Figures 2A and 2B). In the combined presence of H89 and guanfacine, uEPSC amplitude was 9.0 ± 0.6 pA (n = 35 spines, Figures 2A\n\n\n\n---\n\n\n# Figure 2. Both a2R Modulation of AMPARs and GABABR Modulation of NMDARs Are Mediated by Downregulation of PKA\n\n# (A) AMPAR-mediated uEPSCs.\n\nSolid black lines show mean ± SEM (dark gray shading) for responses in the PKA antagonist H89 (10 mM), H89 + guanfacine (40 mM), the PKA activator N-6-benzo-cAMP (bcAMP, 100 mM), or bcAMP + guanfacine (left to right). Light gray and red shaded areas represent mean ± SEM of control and guanfacine groups, respectively, for comparison.\n\n# (B) Bars represent mean amplitudes ±SEM of uEPSC under the above conditions.\n\n# (C) NMDAR-mediated uEPSCs.\n\nSolid black lines show mean ± SEM (dark gray shading) for responses in the PKA antagonist H89 (10 mM), H89 + baclofen (5 mM), the PKA activator bcAMP (100 mM), or bcAMP + baclofen (left to right). Light gray and blue shaded areas represent mean ± SEM of control and baclofen groups, respectively, for comparison.\n\n# (D) 2PLU-evoked Ca2+ transients under the same conditions as in (C).\n\n# (E and F) Bars represent mean amplitudes ±SEM of uEPSC (E) and Ca2+ transients under the above conditions (F).\n\n*p &#x3C; 0.05, Tukey’s multiple comparison test.\n\nWe also examined the actions of the selective PKA activator and cAMP analog N6-benzo-cAMP (bcAMP, 100 mM). In the presence of bcAMP, uEPSC amplitude was 19.1 ± 1.7 pA (n = 30 spines). Combined application of bcAMP and guanfacine produced a uEPSC amplitude of 17.0 ± 1.5 pA (n = 31 spines). A one-way ANOVA comparing all groups revealed significant differences (F = 19.57, p &#x3C; 0.0001) that we explored using post hoc comparisons (significant for p &#x3C; 0.05, Tukey’s test). These analyses revealed that H89 both mimicked and occluded the actions of guanfacine, whereas bcAMP blocked the actions of guanfacine (Figures 2A and 2B).\n\nIn a parallel set of studies, we isolated NMDARs and examined the biochemical mechanisms underlying their modulation by baclofen. In the presence of H89, the NMDAR-mediated uEPSC was 14.8 ± 1.8 pA (n = 29 spines) and the DCa2+ was 0.37 ± 0.03 ΔG/Gsat. Co-application of H89 and baclofen yielded a uEPSC of 15.3 ± 1.9 pA (n = 29 spines) and a DCa2+ of 0.36 ± 0.02 ΔG/Gsat. After bcAMP, the uEPSC was 21.0 ± 1.6 pA and DCa2+ was 0.61 ± 0.03 ΔG/Gsat (n = 30 spines), while combined bcAMP and baclofen produced a uEPSC of 28.0 ± 2.8 pA and a DCa2+ of 0.59 ± 0.02 ΔG/Gsat (n = 31 spines, Figures 2C–2F). As above, Tukey’s post hoc tests (ANOVA, F = 43.48, p &#x3C; 0.0001) revealed that H89 occluded and bcAMP blocked the actions of baclofen on NMDAR-mediated responses (Figures 2C–2F).\n\nOur data indicate that both a2Rs and GABABRs exert control of glutamate receptors via a downregulation of PKA signaling. Phosphorylation of the Serine 845 (S845) residue of the GluA1 subunit is known to regulate AMPA-receptor stability and membrane trafficking (Esteban et al., 2003). We therefore probed whether guanfacine or baclofen altered S845 phosphorylation. Assays were performed on four to six independent samples, and one-way ANOVA revealed significant effects (F = 19.81, p &#x3C; 0.0001) that were investigated with post hoc analyses (Figures 3A and 3B). In comparison to untreated PFC tissue, 10-min incubation with either guanfacine or H89 significantly reduced S845 phosphorylation, while baclofen had no effect. In addition, the adenylate cyclase activator forskolin (50 mM) significantly increased the phosphorylation of AMPARs relative to control.\n\nA recent study identified a novel PKA phosphorylation site on the GluN2B subunit, Serine 1166 (S1166), which modulates the Ca2+ permeability of NMDARs (Murphy et al., 2014). In keeping with our Ca2+ imaging data, we found that application of either baclofen or H89, but not guanfacine, reduced S1166 phosphorylation. Conversely, forskolin enhanced the phosphorylation of the same residue (Figures 3C and 3D, one-way ANOVA, F = 20.48, p &#x3C; 0.0001, Tukey’s post hoc test). These results suggest the involvement of S1166 in the GABAergic regulation of Ca2+ influx through NMDARs, though we cannot rule out the participation of other PKA targets.\n\nTo confirm that functional GluN2B subunits contribute to 2PLU-evoked NMDAR responses in our recordings, we measured NMDAR activation in the presence of the specific GluN2B antagonist ifenprodil (3 mM). Ifenprodil significantly reduced NMDAR currents (22.7 ± 1.8 pA, n = 46 spines versus 14.0 ± 1.4 pA, n = 33 spines, p = 0.0006, Figures S2C and S2D) and DCa2+ (0.54 ± 0.02 ΔG/Gsat, n = 46 spines versus 0.44 ± 0.02 ΔG/Gsat, n = 33 spines, p = 0.0003, Figure S2). Thus, baclofen but not guanfacine diminishes synaptic Ca2+ influx through NMDARs via the dephosphorylation of the GluN2B.\n\n328 Cell Reports 12, 326–334, July 14, 2015 ª2015 The Authors\n\n\n---\n\nCell Reports 12, 326–334, July 14, 2015\n\n# Figure 3. a2R and GABABR Activation Reduces GluA1 (S845) and GluN2B (S1166) Phosphorylation in the PFC, Respectively\n\n|           | p-GluA1 (S845) | GluA1 (total) | p-GluN2B (S1166) | GluN2B (total) |\n| --------- | -------------- | ------------- | ---------------- | -------------- |\n| - 100 kDa | 20             | - 100 kDa     | - 250 kDa        | - 150 kDa      |\n|           | 2.0            |               | 2.0              |                |\n|           | 1.5            |               | 1.5              |                |\n|           | 1.0            |               | 1.0              |                |\n|           | 0.5            |               | 0.5              |                |\n|           | 0.0            |               | 0.0              |                |\n\n(A) Western blot for phosphorylated GluA1 (S845) in prefrontal tissue lysates, left to right: under control (n = 6 animals), guanfacine (40 mM, n = 5 animals), baclofen (5 mM, n = 5 animals), H89 (10 mM, n = 5 animals), or forskolin (50 mM, n = 4 animals) conditions (top). Membranes were then re-blotted for total GluA1 (bottom).\n\n(B) Quantification of S845 phosphorylation. Bars show mean ± SEM normalized to control (black) in guanfacine (red), baclofen (blue), H89 (striped), and forskolin (green).\n\n(C) Western blots depicting GluN2B (S1166) phosphorylation (top) and total GluN2B (bottom) in, left to right: control (n = 5 animals), guanfacine (40 mM, n = 6 animals), baclofen (5 mM, n = 6 animals), H89 (10 mM, n = 5 animals), or forskolin (50 mM, n = 5 animals).\n\n(D) Bars represent mean ± SEM. S1166 phosphorylation in control (black), guanfacine (red), baclofen (blue), H89 (striped), and forskolin (green). *p &#x3C; 0.05, Tukey’s multiple comparison test.\n\n# Adrenergic and GABAergic Actions Are Localized to the Same Dendritic Spine\n\nAs our initial studies compared separate populations of spines in control and treatment conditions, one explanation for our findings is that either guanfacine or baclofen may act non-cell-autonomously such that the two PKA-dependent signaling pathways occur in different cells. To test this possibility, we co-applied guanfacine and baclofen while stimulating a single synapse using 2PLU. We monitored both uEPSCs and DCa2+ while voltage clamping the cell at either -70 mV or +40 mV to measure AMPAR- or NMDAR-mediated responses, respectively (Figure 4). Compared to baseline, combined application of guanfacine and baclofen for 10 min decreased AMPAR currents (18.8 ± 2.8 pA versus 12.1 ± 1.7 pA, n = 6 spines, p = 0.0163, paired t test, Figure 4A). As above, the drug combination did not change NMDAR-mediated currents (12.7 ± 2.5 pA versus 15.6 ± 5.1 pA, n = 6 spines, p = 0.9220, paired t test, Figure 4B) but decreased DCa2+ (0.21 ± 0.04 DG/Gsat versus 0.12 ± 0.03 DG/Gsat, p = 0.0132, paired t tests, Figure 4C). Importantly, the combined actions of guanfacine and baclofen on AMPAR-mediated currents (n = 6 spines, p = 0.626, paired t test) and NMDAR-mediated Ca2+ influx (n = 6 spines, p = 0.6555, paired t test) were occluded by adding the membrane-impermeable PKA antagonist PKI(6-22) (20 mM) to the recording pipette (Figures 4A–4C). These results confirm that the PKA-dependent actions of a2Rs and GABABRs cell-autonomously modulate both types of glutamate receptors.\n\nOur results might also be explained if a2Rs and GABABRs are not co-localized, giving rise to a physical segregation of signaling pathways that could produce a functional dissociation. To test this possibility, we performed three sets of experiments. First, we used a puffer pipette to locally apply a combination of guanfacine and baclofen to a small dendritic region while holding the cell at either -70 mV or +40 mV (Figures 5A–5D). This focal drug application yielded similar results to bath application. AMPAR-mediated currents were decreased (19.7 ± 2.6 pA to 9.3 ± 1.9 pA, n = 10, p = 0.0083), NMDAR-mediated currents were not altered (11.4 ± 2.1 pA versus 10.7 ± 2.1 pA, n = 10, p = 0.39), and NMDAR-mediated DCa2+ was decreased (0.22 ± 0.05 DG/Gsat versus 0.088 ± 0.02 DG/Gsat, n = 10, p = 0.0055).\n\nSecond, we performed immunohistochemical triple-staining to test for co-localization of a2Rs and GABABRs at the postsynaptic density (Figures 5E and 5F; see Supplemental Experimental Procedures). a2Rs and GABABRs were significantly more co-localized with the postsynaptic protein PSD95 than the presynaptic marker bassoon or a pixel-shuffled control. Third, we tested the actions of a2Rs and GABABRs on voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs), known to be modulated by a PKA-independent pathway involving the membrane delimited beta-gamma subunits (Gbg) associated with Gai (Herlitze et al., 1996; Yan and Surmeier, 1996). We monitored VGCC-dependent DCa2+ in spines and adjacent dendritic shafts evoked by back-propagating action potentials (bAPs, Figure S3; see Experimental Procedures) (Sabatini and Svoboda, 2000). Under control conditions, DCa2+ in spines was 0.052 ± 0.003 DG/Gsat (n = 34 spines). In the presence of either guanfacine or baclofen, DCa2+ was 0.029 ± 0.002 DG/Gsat (n = 38 spines) or 0.031 ± 0.001 DG/Gsat (n = 41 spines), respectively. Combined application of guanfacine and baclofen produced a DCa2+ of 0.036 ± 0.003 DG/Gsat (n = 33 spines, Figures S3B–S3E). One-way ANOVA (F = 20.52, p &#x3C; 0.0001) with post hoc testing revealed that both guanfacine and baclofen significantly reduced DCa2+, but there was no additional effect of combining the two drugs. Similar results were seen for DCa2+ in the corresponding dendritic shafts. These results indicate modulation of physically overlapping pools of VGCCs. Thus, the combination of findings\n\n©2015 The Authors\n\n---\n\n\n# Figure 4.\n\n# a2Rs and GABABRs Cell Autonomously Modulate Glutamate Receptors\n\n|        | Ai        | PKI(6-22) | Aii   |    |   | Bii |   | C      |   |\n| ------ | --------- | --------- | ----- | -- | - | --- | - | ------ | - |\n| -70 mV | -70 mV    | 25        | \\*    |    |   | 20  |   | +40 mV |   |\n| 20     | -Baseline | -Baseline | 15    |    |   | 10  |   |        |   |\n| 5      | -GF + Bac | -GF + Bac | 5 pA  | 0  |   |     |   |        |   |\n|        |           |           | 0     |    |   | 0   |   |        |   |\n|        |           |           | 10 ms |    |   | 20  |   |        |   |\n|        |           |           | e     | 15 |   |     |   |        |   |\n\n(Ai and Bi) (Ai) Mean ± SEM traces (solid lines and shaded areas, respectively) of 2PLU-evoked uEPSCs from a single spine with the cell voltage clamped at 70 mV or at (Bi) +40 mV to measure AMPAR- and NMDAR-mediated currents, respectively. Black traces are uEPSCs during baseline recording, magenta traces show currents following 10 min exposure to guanfacine plus baclofen (n = 6 spines on six cells).\n\n(Ci) Mean ± SEM traces (solid lines and shaded areas, respectively) showing DCa2+ traces with the cell voltage clamped at +40 mV during baseline (black) and after guanfacine plus baclofen flow in (magenta).\n\n(Aii–Cii) Same experiment as in (Ai)–(Ci), but with the membrane-impermeable PKA inhibitor PKI(6-22) (20 mM) in the recording pipette (n = 6 spines on six cells).\n\n(Aiii and Biii) Mean ± SEM uEPSC amplitudes (bars) and for each individual cell (lines) recorded at 70 or +40 mV holding potential during baseline (gray) and post guanfacine and baclofen (magenta) using control- or PKI(6-22)-containing pipette solution.\n\n(Ciii) As above for NMDAR-mediated Ca2+ transients.\n\n*p &#x3C; 0.05, paired t test.\n\n# Preferential Structural Co-localization of GPCRs with Glutamate Receptors\n\nOur results indicate functional coupling of a2Rs with AMPARs and GABABRs with NMDARs. To determine whether these receptor groupings have a structural underpinning, we performed a proximity ligation assay that identifies proteins localized within 10–15 nm from each other (Soderberg et al., 2006). Co-staining for GluA1 and a2R produced significantly higher labeling density than for GluA1 and GABABR (1.7 ± 0.2 versus 0.9 ± 0.1 puncta per 100 mm², n = 31 images from three mice, p = 0.0004). Similarly, co-staining for NR1 and GABABR produced significantly higher labeling density than for NR1 and a2R (1.2 ± 0.09 versus 0.76 ± 0.08 puncta per 100 mm², n = 31 images from three mice, p = 0.0004, Figure 6). This preferential structural localization of a2Rs/AMPARs and GABABRs/NMDARs at synapses suggests the existence of synaptic microdomains where neuromodulation can occur independently despite utilization of similar biochemical signaling pathways.\n\n# RGS4 Limits the Crosstalk between Different Gai-Coupled Receptors\n\nOur results suggest the surprising conclusion that separate, parallel modulation of glutamate receptors occurs without biochemical crosstalk in single spines. Notably, although activation of Gi/o-coupled receptors decreases the amount of cAMP and active PKA in the spine, the concentration of the active mobile Gai subunit is increased. Thus, some mechanism must limit the functional mobility of Gai to prevent signaling crosstalk. One such mechanism might involve Regulators of G protein Signaling (RGS) proteins that accelerate hydrolysis of GTP to GDP, hastening the self-inactivation of Gai (Arshavsky and Pugh, 1998; Watson et al., 1996; Zhong et al., 2003). To test this possibility, we measured 2PLU-evoked synaptic currents and corresponding Ca2+ transients in the presence of a selective small molecule inhibitor (CCG50014; Blazer et al., 2011; Turner et al., 2012) that targets RGS4, the most abundant RGS family member in layer 5 pyramidal neurons of the PFC (Ebert et al., 2006; Gold et al., 1997).\n\nCCG50014 (5 mM) by itself did not alter responses mediated by either NMDARs or AMPARs (Figures 7A–7C). However, in contrast to our earlier findings, in the presence of CCG50014, baclofen produced a significant reduction in AMPAR-mediated currents (17.5 ± 1.6 pA, n = 31 spines versus 10.0 ± 1.1 pA, n = 32 spines, p &#x3C; 0.001). Guanfacine also reduced AMPAR-mediated currents (to 9.7 ± 0.8 pA, n = 30 spines, p &#x3C; 0.001) similarly to guanfacine alone (p > 0.05) (Figure 7A). Conversely, in the presence of CCG50014, guanfacine produced a significant reduction in NMDAR-mediated currents (27.6 ± 2.8 pA, n = 30 spines versus 15.4 ± 2.4, n = 32 spines, p &#x3C; 0.01) and DCa2+ (0.68 ± 0.03 DG/Gsat versus 0.5 ± 0.03 DG/Gsat, p &#x3C; 0.001, Figures 7B and 7C). Notably, in combination with CCG50014, baclofen also reduced NMDAR-mediated currents (to 7.8 ± 1.2 pA, n = 35 spines, p &#x3C; 0.001; Figures 7A and 7C) and DCa2+ (to 0.37 ± 0.03 DG/Gsat in CCG50014+baclofen, p &#x3C; 0.001; Figures 7B and 7C).\n\nTo confirm the specificity of our results, we dialyzed neurons with an antibody against RGS4 via the patch pipette, a method.\n\n\n\n---\n\n\n# Figure 5.\n\n# a2Rs and GABABRs Are in the Same Dendritic Spine\n\n(A) Two-photon image of a L5 pyramidal neuron (red) and two-photon differential interference contrast (DIC) image (gray) showing the puffer pipette near the recorded dendritic spine (arrow). White arrowhead is pointing in the direction of ACSF flow in the chamber.\n\n|   | uEPSC  | uEPSC |        |       | ΔCa{2}+40 mv |           |   |\n| - | ------ | ----- | ------ | ----- | ------------ | --------- | - |\n|   | -70 mV |       | +40 mV | D     |              |           |   |\n|   |        | 5 pA  | 5 pA   | 20 ms | 100 ms sat   | ACSF flow |   |\n\nMean ± SEM uEPSC traces (solid lines and shaded areas, respectively) of 2PLU-evoked uEPSCs from a single spine with the cell voltage clamped at -70 mV or at +40 mV to measure AMPAR- and NMDAR-mediated currents and Ca2+ influx, respectively. Black traces are uEPSCs during baseline recording, magenta traces show currents following 10 min exposure to locally applied guanfacine plus baclofen (n = 10 spines on ten cells).\n\n# (Aii–Cii) uEPSC and Ca2+ transient amplitudes:\n\nmean ± SEM (bars) and for each individual cell separately (lines) recorded at -70 or +40 mV holding potential during baseline (gray) and post-guanfacine and baclofen (magenta).\n\n(Ei) Representative confocal images of PSD95 (green), a2R (red), and GABABR (blue) co-staining. White arrows point to both GPCRs co-localizing with PSD95.\n\n(Eii) Bars showing average co-localization of both a2Rs and GABABRs with PSD95 (green) or Bassoon (black) in original or pixel-shifted (gray) images.\n\npreviously shown to specifically inhibit RGS4 function (Liu et al., 2006), and performed similar experiments (Figure S4). We found that, with the RGS4 antibody in the pipette solution, baclofen significantly reduced AMPAR-mediated currents (21.1 ± 1.6 pA, n = 30 spines versus 14.14 ± 0.98 pA, n = 32 spines, p = 0.0003). In complementary experiments, in the presence of the RGS4 antibody, guanfacine reduced NMDAR-mediated currents (20.7 ± 2 pA, n = 31 spines versus 7.15 ± 1.3 pA, n = 34 spines, p &#x3C; 0.0001) and DCa2+ (0.633 ± 0.017 DG/Gsat versus 0.34 ± 0.02 DG/Gsat, p &#x3C; 0.0001). In conclusion, our data indicate that RGS4 prevents crosstalk between biochemical signaling cascades and preserves neuromodulatory specificity.\n\n# DISCUSSION\n\nMultiple neuromodulatory systems coupled to GPCRs share common signal transduction pathways. In the prefrontal cortex, neuronal activity is regulated by Gai-mediated signaling through receptors for norepinephrine, GABA, dopamine (D2), and acetylcholine (M2, M4). However, it remains largely unknown how individual neurons distinguish between these modulatory inputs and prevent crosstalk between similar biochemical signaling pathways. Here, we found that activation of a2Rs and GABABRs selectively inhibits AMPARs and NMDARs, respectively, and that this modulation occurs at single glutamatergic synapses. In both cases, the regulation of glutamate receptors occurs via a Gai-dependent reduction in PKA activity. Our evidence suggests that all four receptors are present in individual spines with a preferential co-localization (&#x3C;20 nm) of a2Rs/AMPARs and GABABRs/NMDARs. Under control conditions, crosstalk between a2R- and GABABR-coupled signaling cascades is prevented by the actions of RGS4, a GTPase Activating Protein (GAP) that targets Gai (Watson et al., 1996). Our results provide evidence for a novel mechanism by which biochemical signaling pathways are functionally compartmentalized and highlight the role of RGS4 in regulating synaptic transmission (Figure S5). In future studies, it will be interesting to determine whether other modulatory pathways (e.g., D2 dopamine receptors) obey similar compartmentalization to regulate specific glutamate receptors.\n\n# Establishment of Synaptic Microdomains for Neuromodulation\n\nOur data show that, under control conditions, there is no crosstalk between a2R- and GABABR-mediated modulation of glutamate receptors despite similar actions on cAMP and PKA activity. One explanation for this compartmentalization is that a2Rs and GABABRs are located on different dendritic spines. We excluded this possibility by (1) showing that AMPAR- and NMDAR-dependent synaptic responses evoked by stimulation of a single spine are reduced by focal co-application of guanfacine and baclofen, (2) showing that a2Rs and GABABRs co-localize with PSD95, and (3) finding that guanfacine and baclofen mutually occlude each other’s modulation of VGCCs. A second explanation for our data is that one or both of the actions of guanfacine and baclofen occur via distinct, non-cell-autonomous mechanisms. However, we find that loading single cells with a membrane impermeable PKA antagonist occludes the modulation of both AMPARs and NMDARs, arguing that the relevant a2Rs and GABABRs are localized to the recorded neuron. A third possibility is that a2Rs and GABABRs are located in the same spines, and the lack of crosstalk is mediated by functional compartmentalization of signaling cascades.\n\n\n\n---\n\n\n# Figure 6.\n\na2Rs Preferentially Localize near AMPARs while GABABRs Preferentially Localize near NMDARs\n\n# (A)\n\nRepresentative confocal images from PFC sections after proximity ligation assay. Tissue was stained with antibodies against the indicated targets. Bright puncta indicate positive PLA reactions.\n\n# (B)\n\nBars indicate mean ± SEM number of puncta per 100 mm.\n\n| A         | GluA1 - α2R | GluA1 - GABAR |     |    |    | -60 mV    |                | Aii  | 20 |       |    |                  |\n| --------- | ----------- | ------------- | --- | -- | -- | --------- | -------------- | ---- | -- | ----- | -- | ---------------- |\n|           |             |               |     |    | 20 |           | 5 pA           | he₁₅ |    | 10 ms | 20 | \\*               |\n|           |             | B             | 2.5 | \\* |    | CCG 50014 |                | 10   |    |       |    |                  |\n|           |             | 20            |     |    |    |           |                | 5 -  |    | 2.0   |    | CCG + Guanfacine |\n| NR1 - α2R | NR1 - GABAR | 1.5           |     |    | Bi |           | CCG + Baclofen | Bii  | 0  |       |    |                  |\n|           |             | 1.0           |     |    |    | -60 mV    |                | 40   |    | he    |    |                  |\n|           | 0.5         |               | 0   |    | 20 |           |                | 30-  |    |       |    |                  |\n|           | 10 μm       | GABAR         | +   | +  |    |           |                |      |    |       |    |                  |\n\n# Figure 7.\n\nBlocking RGS4 Enables Crosstalk between Modulatory Signaling Pathways\n\n# (Ai)\n\nAMPAR-mediated currents in the presence of CCG50014 alone (black) or in combination with guanfacine (red) or baclofen (blue).\n\n# (Bi and Ci)\n\n(Bi) NMDAR-mediated currents and (Ci) Ca2+ transients in the presence of the RGS4 inhibitor CCG50014 either alone (black) or in combination with guanfacine (red) or baclofen (blue). Traces show mean ± SEM (solid lines and shaded areas, respectively).\n\n# (Aii)\n\nMean amplitude ±SEM of AMPAR-mediated currents in control (gray), guanfacine (pink), and baclofen (light blue), reproduced from Figure 1, or in CCG50014 (black), CCG50014 with guanfacine (red), and CCG50014 with baclofen (blue).\n\n# (Bii and Cii)\n\nBars represent mean amplitude ±SEM of NMDAR-mediated currents (Bii) and Ca2+ transients (Cii) in control (gray), guanfacine (pink), and baclofen (light blue) from Figure 1, or in CCG50014 (black), CCG50014 with guanfacine (red), and CCG50014 with baclofen (blue).\n\n*p &#x3C; 0.05, Tukey’s multiple comparison test.\n\nConclusion is strongly supported by our results, which suggest a novel functional microdomain established by the limited lifetime of Gai, whose signaling is terminated by its endogenous GTPase activity (Arshavsky and Pugh, 1998). The ability of Gai subunits to hydrolyze GTP is strongly accelerated by Regulators of G protein Signaling (RGS) proteins (Watson et al., 1996). Of this protein family, RGS4 is strongly expressed in layer 5 of the PFC (Ebert et al., 2006). Here, we show that blocking RGS4 activity pharmacologically (CCG50014) or by dialyzing the cells with an antibody against RGS4 impairs the selectivity of Gai-coupled neuromodulators, thus enabling crosstalk of second messenger systems and leading to a breakdown in signal specificity in dendritic spines of layer 5 pyramidal neurons (Figure S8). Notably, previous computational work explicitly predicted a role for RGS4 in restricting Gai signaling to a small microdomain (Zhong et al., 2003). In this model, high RGS4 activity can limit diffusion of GTP-bound Gai to &#x3C;20 nm. This suggestion is supported by our proximity ligation assay data, which suggest preferential postsynaptic coupling of a2Rs/AMPARs and GABABRs/NMDARs within 20 nm (Soderberg et al., 2006). There is mounting anatomical evidence that synaptic proteins, including glutamate receptors, are organized into 70- to 80-nm clusters within the postsynaptic density (MacGillavry et al., 2013; Nair et al., 2013). Precedent for such structural links was shown previously for a presynaptic b2-adrenergic-AMPAR signaling complex allowing highly localized cAMP signaling in the hippocampus (Joiner et al., 2010). Here, we demonstrate a functional role for these nano-structures and provide a plausible biochemical mechanism for the segregation of signaling domains within a single synapse.\n\nWe note that an additional explanation for our results is that both adrenergic and GABAergic activity stimulates an unidentified non-canonical (e.g., not adenylate cyclase-mediated) signaling pathway that inhibits cross-modulation of glutamate receptors. While possible, this explanation seems unlikely given the findings that two independent methods of blocking RGS4 activity lead to cross-modulation. Thus, this alternative explanation would require the existence of an unidentified GPCR-coupled pathway that is also regulated by RGS4.\n\nSurprisingly, we find that blocking RGS4 activity allows both guanfacine and baclofen to modulate the total current through NMDARs in addition to the Ca2+ influx. A similar result was seen when blocking PKA signaling directly with H89. This result suggests a second PKA target on the NMDAR, in addition to GluN2B S1166, such as GluN1 S897, that controls total current magnitude. We propose that modest reduction in PKA signaling (as occurs with activation of GABABRs) influences Ca2+ influx by selectively dephosphorylating S1166, while stronger reduction in PKA signaling (either with a pharmacological block or the increased activity of Gai following RGS4 block) leads to.\n\n\n\n---\n\n\n# Western Blot Analysis\n\nBrain slices containing the PFC were prepared as described and incubated with normal ACSF for control or ACSF supplemented with either guanfacine 40 mM, baclofen 5 mM, H89 10 mM, or forskolin 50 mM for 10 min at 32 C–34 C before the prefrontal cortex was dissected out, homogenized, and lysed in 20 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA and 1 3 Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail and 0.5% SDS (pH 8.0). After centrifugation, samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. Primary antibodies against phosphorylated GluA1 S845, phosphorylated GluN2B S1166 or RGS4 were applied overnight. Bands were visualized using standard HRP procedures. Membranes were then stripped from antibodies, re-blocked, and immunoreacted with non-phospho specific anti-GluA1 or anti-GluN2B primary antibody to establish total amount of GluA1 or GluN2B in the samples. Scanned autoradiography images were analyzed with ImageJ. Phosphorylation was quantified as phosphorylated/total protein and normalized to the control values of each experiment.\n\n# Immunofluorescence and Proximity Ligation Assay\n\nC57/bl6 mice were transcardially perfused with phosphate buffer (PB) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. To expose synaptic proteins, sections (70 mm) containing the PFC were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 and then treated with 0.25 mg/ml pepsin for 10 min at 37 C in 0.2 N HCl. Primary antibodies against PSD95 or Bassoon, a2R, and GABAbR were applied overnight. Following secondary antibody staining, images were collected from the PFC region and analyzed in Cell Profiler. Co-localization is given as the percentage of PSD95 or Bassoon puncta overlapping with both a2R and GABABR staining. To perform proximity ligation assay, 70-mm sections containing the PFC were obtained from the mice and pepsin treated as described. Glutamate receptors were co-labeled with GPCRs using primary antibodies against GluA1 or GluN1 and a2R or GABAbR. Proximity ligation assay (PLA) was performed using a Duolink In Situ kit (Sigma) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Images were randomly collected from the PFC region of the sections and analyzed in Cell Profiler.\n\n# Electrophysiology and Imaging\n\nAll experiments were conducted at near physiological temperature (32 C–34 C). For voltage-clamp recordings, glass electrodes (1.8-3.0 MU) were filled with internal solution containing (in mM): 135 CsMeSO3, 10 HEPES, 4 MgCl2, 4 Na ATP, 0.4 NaGTP, 10 sodium creatine phosphate, and 0.2% Neurobiotin (Vector Laboratories), Alexa Fluor-594 (10 mM), Fluo-5F (300 mM), adjusted to pH 7.3 with CsOH. Electrophysiological recordings were made using a Multiclamp 700B amplifier, filtered at 4 kHz, and digitized at 10 kHz. Two-photon imaging was accomplished with a custom-modified Olympus BX51-WI microscope. Fluorophores were excited using 840 nm light from a pulsed titanium-sapphire laser and emissions collected by photomultiplier tubes (Hamamatsu). For focal stimulation of single dendritic spines, we used two-photon laser uncaging of glutamate (2PLU). To photorelease glutamate, a second Ti-Sapphire laser tuned to 720 nm was introduced into the light path using polarization optics. Back propagating action potentials (bAPs) were evoked by injecting brief current pulses (2 nA, 2 ms) into the cell through the recording pipette.\n\n# Data Acquisition and Analysis\n\nImaging and physiology data were acquired using National Instruments data acquisition boards and custom software written in MATLAB. Off-line analysis was performed using custom routines written in MATLAB and IgorPro. Statistical comparisons were conducted in GraphPad Prism 5. Unless otherwise stated, all data were analyzed using two-tailed, unpaired t tests.\n\n# Pharmacology and Reagents\n\n2PLU experiments were performed in normal ACSF supplemented with MNI-glutamate (2.5 mM) and D-serine (10 mM). To isolate AMPAR-mediated currents, we added TTX (1 mM), picrotoxin (50 mM), CGP55845 (3 mM), and CPP (10 mM) to the ACSF. To isolate NMDAR-mediated currents, we modified our original ACSF to contain 0 mM Mg and 3 mM Ca2+ and included TTX (1mM), picrotoxin (50mM), CGP55845 (3 mM), and NBQX 10 mM. In experiments investigating the effects of baclofen, CGP55845 was omitted from the solutions. For PKA pharmacology, we applied H89 (10 mM) or N6-benzo-cAMP (100 mM, Millipore). In some experiments, we included PKI(6-22) (20mM) in the recording pipette. To block the actions of RGS4, we added CCG50014 (5 mM). All compounds were from Tocris except where noted.\n\n# AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS\n\nG.L. and M.J.H. designed and performed the experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper.\n\n# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS\n\nThe authors thank J. Cardin, S. Tomita, and members of M.J.H.’s laboratory for comments during the preparation of this manuscript. The work was funded by grants from the Smith Family Foundation (M.J.H.), The Yale Brown-Coxe Memorial Fund (G.L.), The Brain and Behavior Research Foundation (M.J.H. and G.L.), and the NIH: MH099045 (M.J.H.).\n\n# Received:\n\nJanuary 8, 2014\n\n# Revised:\n\nMarch 14, 2015\n\n# Accepted:\n\nJune 5, 2015\n\n# Published:\n\nJuly 2, 2015\n\n# REFERENCES\n\nArnsten, A.F. (2011). Catecholamine influences on dorsolateral prefrontal cortical networks. Biol. Psychiatry 69, e89–e99.\n\nArshavsky, V.Y., and Pugh, E.N., Jr. (1998). Lifetime regulation of G protein-effector complex: emerging importance of RGS proteins. Neuron 20, 11–14.\n\n\n\n---\n\n\n# References\n\n1. Blazer, L.L., Zhang, H., Casey, E.M., Husbands, S.M., and Neubig, R.R. (2011). A nanomolar-potency small molecule inhibitor of regulator of G-protein signaling proteins. Biochemistry 50, 3181–3192.\n2. Carter, A.G., and Sabatini, B.L. (2004). State-dependent calcium signaling in dendritic spines of striatal medium spiny neurons. Neuron 44, 483–493.\n3. Chalifoux, J.R., and Carter, A.G. (2010). GABAB receptors modulate NMDA receptor calcium signals in dendritic spines. Neuron 66, 101–113.\n4. Chen, G., Chen, P., Tan, H., Ma, D., Dou, F., Feng, J., and Yan, Z. (2008). Regulation of the NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic response by acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and its impairment in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 29, 1795–1804.\n5. Destexhe, A., Mainen, Z.F., and Sejnowski, T.J. (1994). Synthesis of models for excitable membranes, synaptic transmission and neuromodulation using a common kinetic formalism. J. Comput. Neurosci. 1, 195–230.\n6. Dismukes, R.K. (1979). New concepts of molecular communication among neurons. Behav. Brain Sci. 2, 409–416.\n7. Ebert, P.J., Campbell, D.B., and Levitt, P. (2006). Bacterial artificial chromosome transgenic analysis of dynamic expression patterns of regulator of G-protein signaling 4 during development. I. Cerebral cortex. Neuroscience 142, 1145–1161.\n8. Esteban, J.A., Shi, S.H., Wilson, C., Nuriya, M., Huganir, R.L., and Malinow, R. (2003). PKA phosphorylation of AMPA receptor subunits controls synaptic trafficking underlying plasticity. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 136–143.\n9. Gamo, N.J., and Arnsten, A.F. (2011). Molecular modulation of prefrontal cortex: rational development of treatments for psychiatric disorders. Behav. Neurosci. 125, 282–296.\n10. Gold, S.J., Ni, Y.G., Dohlman, H.G., and Nestler, E.J. (1997). Regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS) proteins: region-specific expression of nine subtypes in rat brain. J. Neurosci. 17, 8024–8037.\n11. Herlitze, S., Garcia, D.E., Mackie, K., Hille, B., Scheuer, T., and Catterall, W.A. (1996). Modulation of Ca2+ channels by G-protein beta gamma subunits. Nature 380, 258–262.\n12. Higley, M.J., and Sabatini, B.L. (2008). Calcium signaling in dendrites and spines: practical and functional considerations. Neuron 59, 902–913.\n13. Ji, X.H., Ji, J.Z., Zhang, H., and Li, B.M. (2008). Stimulation of alpha2-adrenoceptors suppresses excitatory synaptic transmission in the medial prefrontal cortex of rat. Neuropsychopharmacology 33, 2263–2271.\n14. Joiner, M.L., Qian, Lise, M.F., Yuen, E.Y., Kam, A.Y., Zhang, M., Hall, D.D., Malik, H., Chen, Y., Ulrich, J.D., et al. (2010). Assembly of a beta2-adrenoreceptor—GluR1 signalling complex for localized cAMP signalling. EMBO J. 29, 482–495.\n15. Kesner, R.P., and Churchwell, J.C. (2011). An analysis of rat prefrontal cortex in mediating executive function. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 96, 417–431.\n16. Knight, A.R., and Bowery, N.G. (1996). The pharmacology of adenylyl cyclase modulation by GABAB receptors in rat brain slices. Neuropharmacology 35, 703–712.\n17. Kulik, A., Vida, I., Lujan, R., Haas, C.A., Lopez-Bendito, G., Shigemoto, R., and Frotscher, M. (2003). Subcellular localization of metabotropic GABA(B) receptor subunits GABA(B1a/b) and GABA(B2) in the rat hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 23, 11026–11035.\n18. Levitt, P., Ebert, P., Mirnics, K., Nimgaonkar, V.L., and Lewis, D.A. (2006). Making the case for a candidate vulnerability gene in schizophrenia: convergent evidence for regulator of G-protein signaling 4 (RGS4). Biol. Psychiatry 60, 534–537.\n19. Lisman, J.E., Raghavachari, S., and Tsien, R.W. (2007). The sequence of events that underlie quantal transmission at central glutamatergic synapses. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 597–609.\n20. Liu, W., Yuen, E.Y., Allen, P.B., Feng, J., Greengard, P., and Yan, Z. (2006). Adrenergic modulation of NMDA receptors in prefrontal cortex is differentially regulated by RGS proteins and spinophilin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 18338–18343.\n21. MacGillavry, H.D., Song, Y., Raghavachari, S., and Blanpied, T.A. (2013). Nanoscale scaffolding domains within the postsynaptic density concentrate synaptic AMPA receptors. Neuron 78, 615–622.\n22. Murphy, J.A., Stein, I.S., Lau, C.G., Peixoto, R.T., Aman, T.K., Kaneko, N., Aromolaran, K., Saulnier, J.L., Popescu, G.K., Sabatini, B.L., et al. (2014). Phosphorylation of Ser1166 on GluN2B by PKA is critical to synaptic NMDA receptor function and Ca2+ signaling in spines. J. Neurosci. 34, 869–879.\n23. Nair, D., Hosy, E., Petersen, J.D., Constals, A., Giannone, G., Choquet, D., and Sibarita, J.B. (2013). Super-resolution imaging reveals that AMPA receptors inside synapses are dynamically organized in nanodomains regulated by PSD95. J. Neurosci. 33, 13204–13224.\n24. Raymond, L.A., Tingley, W.G., Blackstone, C.D., Roche, K.W., and Huganir, R.L. (1994). Glutamate receptor modulation by protein phosphorylation. J. Physiol. Paris 88, 181–192.\n25. Sabatini, B.L., and Svoboda, K. (2000). Analysis of calcium channels in single spines using optical fluctuation analysis. Nature 408, 589–593.\n26. Soderberg, O., Gullberg, M., Jarvius, M., Ridderstrale, K., Leuchowius, K.J., Jarvius, J., Wester, K., Hydbring, P., Bahram, F., Larsson, L.G., and Landegren, U. (2006). Direct observation of individual endogenous protein complexes in situ by proximity ligation. Nat. Methods 3, 995–1000.\n27. Stan, A.D., and Lewis, D.A. (2012). Altered cortical GABA neurotransmission in schizophrenia: insights into novel therapeutic strategies. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 13, 1557–1562.\n28. Summers, R.J., and McMartin, L.R. (1993). Adrenoceptors and their second messenger systems. J. Neurochem. 60, 10–23.\n29. Turner, E.M., Blazer, L.L., Neubig, R.R., and Husbands, S.M. (2012). Small molecule inhibitors of regulator of g protein signalling (RGS) proteins. ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 3, 146–150.\n30. Tyacke, R.J., Lingford-Hughes, A., Reed, L.J., and Nutt, D.J. (2010). GABAB receptors in addiction and its treatment. Adv. Pharmacol. 58, 373–396.\n31. Wang, M., Ramos, B.P., Paspalas, C.D., Shu, Y., Simen, A., Duque, A., Vijayraghavan, S., Brennan, A., Dudley, A., Nou, E., et al. (2007). Alpha2A-adrenoceptors strengthen working memory networks by inhibiting cAMP-HCN channel signaling in prefrontal cortex. Cell 129, 397–410.\n32. Watson, N., Linder, M.E., Druey, K.M., Kehrl, J.H., and Blumer, K.J. (1996). RGS family members: GTPase-activating proteins for heterotrimeric G-protein alpha-subunits. Nature 383, 172–175.\n33. Yan, Z., and Surmeier, D.J. (1996). Muscarinic (m2/m4) receptors reduce N- and P-type Ca2+ currents in rat neostriatal cholinergic interneurons through a fast, membrane-delimited, G-protein pathway. J. Neurosci. 16, 2592–2604.\n34. Yuste, R., Majewska, A., and Holthoff, K. (2000). From form to function: calcium compartmentalization in dendritic spines. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 653–659.\n35. Zhong, H., Wade, S.M., Woolf, P.J., Linderman, J.J., Traynor, J.R., and Neubig, R.R. (2003). A spatial focusing model for G protein signals. Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) protein-mediated kinetic scaffolding. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 7278–7284.\n\n","job_metadata":{"credits_used":0,"job_credits_usage":0,"job_pages":10,"job_auto_mode_triggered_pages":0,"job_is_cache_hit":false}}