{"markdown":"\nTHE BIOLOGICAL JOURNAL\nVol. 267, No. 20, Issue of July 15, pp. 14483-14489, 1992\n1992 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.\nPrinted in U.S.A.\n\n# Functional Comparisons between Isoforms of the Sarcoplasmic or Endoplasmic Reticulum Family of Calcium Pumps*\n\n(Received for publication, March 6, 1992)\n\nJonathan Lytton1, Marisa Westlin2, Scott E. Burk3, Gary Shull4, and David H. MacLennan5\n\nFrom the 1Renal Division and Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, the 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524, and the 3Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto, C. H. Best Institute, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L6, Canada\n\nATP-dependent calcium pumps that reside in intracellular organelles are encoded by a family of structurally related enzymes, termed the sarcoplasmic or endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPases (SERCA), which each have a distinct pattern of tissue-specific and developmentally regulated expression. A COS-1 cell expression system was used to examine the biochemical properties of the isoforms: SERCA1 (fast-twitch skeletal muscle), SERCA2a (cardiac/slow-twitch skeletal muscle), SERCA2b (ubiquitous smooth- and non-muscle), and SERCA3 (non-muscle). Each isoform was expressed efficiently and appeared to be targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum. All isoforms displayed qualitatively similar enzymatic properties and were activated by calcium in a cooperative manner with a Hill coefficient of 2. The quantitative properties of SERCA1 and SERCA2a (the muscle isoforms) were identical in all respects. SERCA2b, however, appeared to have a lower turnover rate for both calcium transport and ATP hydrolysis. SERCA3 displayed a reduced apparent affinity for calcium, an increased apparent affinity for vanadate, and an altered pH dependence when compared with the other isoforms. These properties are consistent with an enzyme in which the equilibrium between the E1 and E2 conformations is shifted toward the E2 state.\n\nCytoplasmic calcium acts as a ubiquitous messenger, controlling many different aspects of cellular physiology. Intracellular organelles play a critical role in this regulation by acting both as sites of storage for subsequent release and as sinks for removal of calcium from the cytoplasm. In striated muscle, calcium is stored principally within the terminal cisternae of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, is released through the calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor) to initiate contraction, and then taken back up into the sarcoplasmic reticulum via the well-characterized Ca2+-ATPase pump to allow relaxation (Lytton and MacLennan, 1991). In smooth- and non-muscle tissues, the calcium storage compartment is thought to be associated with the endoplasmic reticulum.\n\n* This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant DK42879 and in the initial stages by a Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research (both to J. L.), and by a grant from the Medical Research Council of Canada (to D. H. M.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.\n\nTo whom correspondence should be addressed: Renal Div., Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 75 Francis St., Boston, MA 02115. Tel.: 617-732-6691; Fax: 617-732-6392.\n\nComplex patterns of release catalyzed by a variety of agonists have led to the suggestion that these tissues possess at least two distinct calcium storage pools, one sensitive to caffeine and calcium (which stimulate release through the ryanodine receptor) and the other inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (which stimulates calcium release through its own receptor) (Lytton and Nigam, 1992).\n\nBiochemical data clearly demonstrate that non-muscle calcium stores are loaded by an ATP-dependent calcium pump, which bears much similarity to the enzyme of striated muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum (Spamer et al., 1987). Molecular cloning studies have borne this out, and a family of sarcoplasmic or endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA) pumps has been identified (MacLennan et al., 1985; Brandl et al., 1986; Lytton and MacLennan, 1988; Gunteski-Hamblin et al., 1988; Burk et al., 1989). Although a correlation between different calcium storage pools and specific SERCA isoforms has not been established, studies with specific inhibitors have demonstrated an essential role for these enzymes in loading all agonist-sensitive stores (Lytton et al., 1991a; Thastrup, 1990; Bian et al., 1991).\n\nThree separate genes encode this family of calcium pumps. SERCA1 is expressed exclusively in fast-twitch skeletal muscle. Two developmentally regulated alternatively spliced species are transcribed from this gene, denoted “a” and “b,” that encode protein products with different carboxyl termini (Brandl et al., 1987). COS cell expression studies have not revealed a functional difference between the SERCA1a and SERCA1b proteins, and thus the significance of these sequence differences is obscure (Maruyama and MacLennan, 1988). The SERCA2 transcript was originally cloned from natal muscle and subsequently demonstrated to be expressed in both adult slow-twitch skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle at all stages of development (Brandl et al., 1987). The protein product of this gene is about 84% identical to the SERCA1 protein. SERCA2 is also alternatively spliced in the region encoding the carboxyl terminus and produces two protein products. SERCA2a, which terminates in the sequence -Ala-Ile-Leu-Glu, is the major spliced species of this gene expressed in striated muscle. The other transcript, SERCA2b, encodes a protein in which the carboxyl-terminal four amino acids of SERCA2a are replaced by an extended, relatively hydrophobic, sequence of 49 or 50 amino acids. SERCA2b is ubiquitously expressed and appears to represent a generic “endo-\n\nThe abbreviations used are: SERCA, sarcoplasmic or endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase; DMEM, Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing high glucose (4.5 g/l) and pyruvate; EGTA, [ethylenebis(oxyethylenenitrilo)]tetraacetic acid; E-P, the covalently phosphorylated enzyme-intermediate of the Ca2+-ATPase reaction cycle; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; SDS, sodium dodecyl sulfate.\n\n14483\nThis is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.\n\n\n---\n\n\n# Functional Comparison of SERCA Pumps\n\nplasmic reticulum” form of the Ca2+-ATPase (Lytton et al., 1989).\n\nA third gene, SERCA3, encoding a protein about 75% identical to either the SERCA1 or SERCA2 products, was also identified in a variety of non-muscle tissues, although its expression is not as ubiquitous as SERCA2b (Burk et al., 1989). The sequence differences between SERCA3 and the other SERCA isoforms are clustered at the amino terminus, in regions of the nucleotide-binding domain, and at the carboxyl terminus. Interestingly, SERCA3 contains a unique sequence of 15 amino acids at its carboxyl terminus which is remarkably similar to the same region of the adenovirus E3/19K protein demonstrated to provide the signal for retention in the endoplasmic reticulum, suggesting that SERCA3 may also be localized to the endoplasmic reticulum.\n\nAs a consequence of their conserved primary structure, all of the known SERCA isoforms are predicted to have essentially identical transmembrane topologies and tertiary structures. Extensive site-directed mutagenesis studies of the SERCA1 protein have defined many residues which are critical for normal functioning of the enzyme and pump; these are all conserved among the different SERCA isoforms (MacLennan, 1990; Lytton and MacLennan, 1991). Not surprisingly, each isoform has been demonstrated to transport calcium in an ATP-dependent fashion. Furthermore, all of the SERCA isoforms are inhibited by the sesquiterpene lactone, non-phorboid tumor promoter, thapsigargin, although this agent has no effect on either the Na+,K+-ATPase, or the plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase families (Lytton et al., 1991a; Sagara and Inesi, 1991; Campbell et al., 1991). Despite these indications of similarity, it seemed likely that functional differences existed among the SERCA isoforms which, combined with tissue- or cell-specific expression, might impart unique properties of calcium homeostasis to certain cells. In order to test this hypothesis, we have used the COS cell expression system to analyze various biochemical parameters of the SERCA isoforms. Part of this work has been published previously in abstract form (Lytton et al., 1991b).\n\n# EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES\n\n# Materials\n\nCOS-1 or COS-7 cells were obtained from several independent sources. We found that the quantity of SERCA enzyme expression varied dramatically depending upon the exact growth conditions and source of the cells. Our best results were obtained with a clonal derivative of COS-1, M6, isolated in Dr. Randal J. Kaufman’s laboratory at Genetics Institute (Cambridge, MA). The SERCA cDNA constructs used for transfection were subcloned into the expression vectors p91023(B) or pRK1-4 (Genetics Institute).\n\nData concerning SERCA1 were obtained from the rabbit clone corresponding to the adult, “a” transcript. Previous work has established that SERCA1a and SERCA1b are functionally equivalent and, therefore, no further attempts were made to study SERCA1b. SERCA2a and SERCA2b data were obtained from either rabbit or human cDNA clones (pCA3 and HK2, and RbUtP-1 and HK1, respectively), with identical results. SERCA3 data were from the rat clone RK8-13. Control constructs consisted of either vector alone or RK8-13 subcloned in the antisense orientation in p91023(B). The rabbit polyclonal antiserum C4, raised against a trpE-SERCA2 gene fusion product (Lytton and MacLennan, 1988), was affinity purified by absorption to dog cardiac Ca2+-ATPase immobilized on strips of nitrocellulose.\n\n# Electrophoresis and Immunoblotting\n\nSamples for immunoblotting were dissolved without heating in sample buffer containing 2% 8-mercaptoethanol, resolved on 7.5% SDS-polyacrylamide gels according to Laemmli (1970), and electrophoretically transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Towbin et al., 1979). Detection using affinity purified C4 antibody (2 µg/ml) was as described (Lytton and MacLennan, 1988). For the detection of the phosphorylated enzyme-intermediate, 7% polyacrylamide gels were run according to the system of Weber and Osborn (1969), with the pH of the running buffer adjusted to 6.3. After electrophoresis, the gels were fixed for 15 min in 10% acetic acid, 5% methanol, dried, and exposed to x-ray film at -70 °C using an intensifying screen.\n\n# Assays\n\nCalcium uptake, calcium-dependent ATP hydrolysis using the enzyme-coupled spectrophotometric assay system, and phosphorylated enzyme intermediate trapping were performed at a pH of 7.0 essentially as described previously (Lytton et al., 1991a), except that the concentration of potassium oxalate in the uptake buffer was 5 mM. In general, the reactions were initiated by the addition of membranes (5-10 µg of COS microsomes, 0.5-1 µg of fast-twitch skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum, or 1-5 µg of cardiac muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum), except for the experiments with vanadate, where membranes were preincubated with vanadate in buffer without ATP for 15 min at room temperature, and uptake was then initiated by the addition of ATP.\n\n\n\n---\n\n\nFunctional Comparison of SERCA Pumps\n\ntime points in the linear range were used (5-10 min for COS micro-\n\nsom es, 3-5 min for cardiac muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum, and 1-2\n\nmin for fast-twitch muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum). For the phos-\n\nphorylated enzyme intermediate trapping experiments, the acid-pre-\n\ncipitated protein was either dissolved in 200 µl of 0.1 M NaOH, 0.1%\n\nSDS, and the entire sample counted using Cherenkov radiation (for\n\nquantitation), or the pellet was washed quickly in ice-cold water,\n\ndissolved in 25 µl of sample buffer, and applied to an SDS-polyacryl-\n\namide gel run according to Weber and Osborn (1969) at pH 6.3 (see\n\nabove).\n\nDifferent concentrations of free calcium were generated using\n\nEGTA as a buffer. The EGTA-Ca2+ dissociation constant (Ka)\n\ncorrected for ionic strength (I) and pH according to the data was\n\nHarafuji and Ogawa (1980) using the following equation.\n\nl~g(Ka) = 6.46 - (2 JZ/(1 - 0.4 I)² (pH - 6.8).\n\nAlthough ATP also has the potential to complex calcium, under the\n\nconditions used for these experiments (micromolar free calcium, and\n\nthe presence of (at least) an equimolar amount of magnesium as\n\nATP), the contribution of ATP to calcium buffering is negligible and\n\nwas ignored in the calculations. The free calcium concentration was\n\nadjusted either by maintaining the total calcium concentration at 0.5\n\nmM (and hence the specific radioactivity of 45CaCl2 in the uptake\n\nexperiments remained constant) while adjusting the concentration of\n\nEGTA, or by varying calcium at a constant EGTA concentration of\n\n0.5 mM, with identical results. For the pH dependence experiment,\n\nthe above equation was used to calculate appropriate EGTA concen-\n\ntrations which maintained a free calcium concentration of 5.\n\nIn other experiments where calcium was not varied, the free concen-\n\ntration was buffered to 3-5 with EGTA.\n\nThe data from experiments measuring the dependence of activity (u)\n\nupon either calcium or ATP concentration have been fit by\n\ncomputer to the general cooperative model for substrate (S) activa-\n\ntion\n\nu = Vmax [S]n / (K1/2 + [S])\n\nwhere Vmax is the maximum activity reached (usually a t maximum\n\nS), K1/2 is the substrate concentration which gives half of Vmax, and\n\nn is the equivalent to the Hill coefficient, which can be thought of\n\nas the number of substrate molecules required/turnover of the enzyme,\n\nrecognizing that this is true only when substrate binding is a highly\n\ncooperative process (Inesi et al., 1990). The program SigmaPlot\n\n(Jandel Scientific), run on an Apple Macintosh II computer, was used\n\nfor general non-linear curve-fitting. The best fits for calcium gave an\n\nn value indistinguishable from 2, while those for ATP gave a value of 1.\n\noxalate-dependent calcium uptake into microsomes isolated from\n\nCOS cells.\n\n# RESULTS\n\nTransient expression of the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase in COS cells has proven to be a very powerful system\n\nfor addressing the relation of structure to function for this\n\nenzyme (Maruyama et al., 1989). We have therefore chosen\n\nthe same system to compare the biochemical properties of the\n\ndifferent calcium pump isoforms. Fig. 1A shows an immuno-\n\nblot, developed with affinity purified C4 polyclonal anti-Ca2+-ATPase antibody, of microsomes isolated from COS cells\n\ntransfected with each of the different SERCA constructs used\n\nin this paper. Each isoform was expressed at high levels\n\ncompared to control transfected cells and migrated with a\n\ncharacteristic pattern. Interestingly, in our gel system\n\nSERCA1 migrated with an apparent size larger than predicted\n\nfrom its sequence compared with the other isoforms (SERCA1, 2a, and\n\n2b are all predicted to be 109.5 kDa, while SERCA2 gene\n\nproducts, including cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum, all showed minor species\n\nrunning just below the major band. In addition, the SERCA2b\n\ndemonstrated a susceptibility to aggregation, not seen\n\nwith the other isoforms, suggesting that this might be related\n\nto the unique extended carboxyl-terminal sequence of this\n\nisoform.\n\nThe capacity for each of the expressed SERCA species to\n\nfunction as a calcium pump is illustrated in Fig. 1B, where\n\nthe calcium uptake from transfected COS cells is followed with time. It seemed\n\npossible that the differences in transport rate\n\nbetween SERCA isoforms reflected fundamentally different rates of turnover\n\nof the different enzymes. To address this issue we determined\n\nthe quantity of active enzyme present in the transfected COS\n\nmicrosomes by trapping the covalent phosphorylated inter-\n\nmediate formed during enzyme turnover (E-P). Fig. 2A illus-\n\ntrates that, in the presence of 2 µM ATP, the calcium-depend-\n\nent incorporation of radioactivity is restricted to the -110-kDa band which represents the SERCA gene products in\n\nmicrosomes from transfected, but not from control cells. This\n\nallowed us to quantify SERCA expression by following\n\nthe amount of calcium-dependent acid-precipitable\n\nradioactivity formed from ATP of known specific radioactivity. Pilot experiments (not shown) established that 2 µM ATP\n\nand 15s on ice produced maximal incorporation. E-P values\n\nof different COS microsome preparations confirmed that the\n\nvariance in calcium uptake from preparation to preparation\n\n(for a single isoform) could be explained largely by different\n\nlevels of active enzyme. Calcium uptake and calcium-depend-\n\nent ATPase activity (both measured at 30 °C) of transfected\n\nCOS microsomes, as well as sarcoplasmic reticulum from\n\nskeletal and cardiac muscle, were normalized to the amount\n\nof measured E-P, and the results are shown in Fig. 2B. While\n\nSERCA 1, 2a, and 3 displayed values not significantly differ-\n\nent from those of either skeletal or cardiac sarcoplasmic\n\nreticulum.\n\n\n\n---\n\n\n# Functional Comparison of SERCA Pumps\n\n# Figure 2\n\nPhosphorylated intermediate formation and SERCA stoichiometry. A, COS cell microsomes (5 µg) transfected with the indicated SERCA isoform constructs were phosphorylated for 15 s on ice either in the presence of 100 µM calcium, or in its absence (1 mM EGTA), precipitated with trichloroacetic acid, and separated on an SDS-polyacrylamide gel at pH 6.3 according to Weber and Osborn (1969). An autoradiogram of the fixed, dried gel is shown. The approximate size of the prestained molecular weight markers (Bio-Rad) is indicated in the margin. B, the enzyme turnover rates for oxalate-dependent calcium uptake and calcium-dependent ATP hydrolysis, both measured during the linear portion of the assays at 30 °C, are shown normalized to the content of calcium-dependent phosphorylated enzyme-intermediate (E-P) measured in each preparation. See “Experimental Procedures” for further details. FSR, sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes from rabbit fast-twitch skeletal muscle. CSR, sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes from dog cardiac muscle. The average ± standard error of the mean for duplicate determinations of turnover number on three different membrane preparations is shown. The average content of E-P was 2450, 470, 80, 45, 57, and 98 pmol/mg protein for FSR, CSR, SERCA1, SERCA2a, SERCA2b, and SERCA3, respectively.\n\n# Figure 3\n\nImmunofluorescence of SERCA expression in COS cells. COS cells were transfected with control plasmid (A), or constructs encoding SERCA1 (B), SERCA2a (C), SERCA2b (D), SERCA3 (E), and grown on glass or permeabilized in coverslips. The cells were fixed and acetone/methanol at -20 °C and incubated with affinity purified C4 polyclonal anti-Ca2+-ATPase antibody followed by fluorescein-conjugated secondary antibody. The periphery of selected cells is shown. See “Experimental Procedures” for further details.\n\nBright cells from SERCA1, 2a, 2b, and 3 transfections, respectively. A typical reticular pattern is observed, with some punctate concentration, suggesting that all SERCA isoforms are expressed in the same, or a similar, membrane compartment with a morphology resembling the endoplasmic reticulum. SERCA3 displayed the most diffuse reticular, least punctate, pattern of all the different isoforms.\n\nA critical parameter for the biological functioning of calcium pumps is their affinity for intracellular calcium, which is also an important point of allosteric regulation both in cardiac muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum and for the plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase (Lytton and MacLennan, 1991; Carafoli, 1992). Calcium affinity was investigated by monitoring the calcium dependence of oxalate-dependent calcium uptake. Fig. 4 shows that COS cell microsomes expressing SERCA1 displayed a dependence virtually identical to that of fast-twitch skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase.\n\nSERCA2b had lower turnover rates for both calcium transport and ATP hydrolysis, suggesting a slower catalytic cycle for this isozyme. Our data are consistent with the results of Campbell et al. (1991) who, in contrast, report equivalent rates of calcium uptake for SERCA1, 2a, and 2b. It is possible that their use of immunoblotting data to normalize uptake measurements provides the explanation for this discrepancy.\n\nThe sequence of SERCA3 contains a region at its carboxyl terminus which may encode a sorting signal not found in the other isoforms (Burk et al., 1989). Furthermore, the alteration of SERCA2b activity might reflect a different membrane environment for that isoform. It was important, therefore, to examine the intracellular location of the SERCA gene products. Fig. 3 illustrates immunofluorescent micrographs of the flattened periphery of selected COS cells labeled using affinity purified C4 antibody followed by a fluorescein-conjugated secondary antibody. Routinely, 5-10% of the cells displayed a strong fluorescent signal, consistent with the expected efficiency of DEAE-dextran-mediated transfection (Ausubel et al., 1992; Maruyama et al., 1988). Fig. 3A shows the punctate fluorescent pattern visible in a typical cell from a control transfection. This pattern is indistinguishable from that of the faint cells in a SERCA construct transfection and presumably corresponds to endogenous SERCA expression in the endoplasmic reticulum of COS cells.\n\nSERCA2a expressed in COS cells also had a K1/2 of -0.4 µM, contrasting with its apparent affinity in cardiac muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum about 0.9 µM where the enzyme is known to be reversibly modulated through an association with the inhibitory protein, phospholamban (Tada et al., 1988; Fujii et al., 1990; Sasaki et al., 1992). Although SERCA2b seemed to display a slightly higher apparent affinity for calcium (K1/2 of 0.27 µM) compared to the other isoforms, this difference may not be significant because the low rate of uptake for SERCA2b introduces greater uncertainty in the data points at low calcium concentration. The K1/2 values we observe for SERCA1, 2a, and 2b are consistent with those obtained by others previously (Fujii et al., 1990; Campbell et al., 1991). SERCA3, on the other hand, had a much lower apparent calcium affinity, about 1.1 µM, very similar to that observed for the Ca2+-ATPase of cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum. The difference in affinity between SERCA1 and 3 was confirmed using two independent assays: Ca2+-ATPase activity and E-P formation, as shown in Fig. 5. In all cases, the data for calcium dependence of enzyme activity were best fit by a model requiring two highly cooperative calcium-binding sites for activity (i.e., a Hill coefficient of about 2).\n\nOne of the regions of largest sequence divergence among the SERCA isoforms is in the nucleotide-binding domain. Thus, it seemed plausible that differences in ATP activation...\n\n\n\n---\n\n\nFunctional Comparison of SERCA Pumps\n\n# Figures\n\n# FIG. 4.\n\nCalcium dependence of calcium transport activity. The calcium dependence of the relative rate of calcium uptake is shown for microsomes from COS cells transfected with the indicated SERCA constructs. For comparison, the data obtained using sarcoplasmic reticulum from either rabbit fast-twitch skeletal muscle (FSR) or dog cardiac muscle (CSR) are also plotted (dashed curves). Measurements were at room temperature during the linear portion of uptake. The averages from between three and 17 independent determinations are shown. The curves represent the best fit of the data to a cooperative model of enzyme activation obtained by general non-linear computer-assisted curve-fitting. See “Experimental Procedures” for further details. The K, values for SERCA1, SERCA2a, SERCA2b, SERCA3, FSR, and CSR, respectively, are (in pM): 0.04, 0.04, 0.02, 0.05, 0.04, and 0.03.\n\n# FIG. 5.\n\nCalcium dependence of Ca2+-ATPase and E-P formation. Microsomes from COS cells transfected with SERCA1 or SERCA3 demonstrate different apparent calcium affinities as measured by the calcium dependence of either Ca2+-ATPase activity (panel A) or phosphorylated enzyme-intermediate formation, E-P (panel B). The averages of two or three separate determinations are shown. The curves represent the best fit of the data to a general cooperative model with n set to 2. See “Experimental Procedures” for further details. The K, values for panel A and B, respectively, are: SERCA1, 0.31 and 0.34; SERCA3, 1.4 and 0.8.\n\n# FIG. 6.\n\nATP dependence of E-P formation. The ATP dependence of phosphorylated enzyme-intermediate (E-P) formation is shown for microsomes from COS cells transfected with the indicated SERCA constructs. For comparison, the data obtained using sarcoplasmic reticulum from either rabbit fast-twitch skeletal muscle (FSR) or dog cardiac muscle (CSR) are also plotted (dashed curves). The averages of duplicate determinations are shown. The curves represent the best fit of the data to a simple one-site model of enzyme activation obtained by general non-linear computer-assisted curve-fitting. See “Experimental Procedures” for further details. The K, values for SERCA1, SERCA2a, SERCA2b, SERCA3, FSR, and CSR, respectively, are: 0.04, 0.04, 0.02, 0.05, 0.04, and 0.03.\n\n# FIG. 7.\n\npH dependence of calcium transport. The rate of calcium transport during the linear portion of the uptake reaction was determined at different pH values for microsomes isolated from COS cells transfected with the indicated SERCA constructs. See “Experimental Procedures” for further details.\n\nCarboxylate residues have been implicated in the high affinity calcium-binding sites involved in transport (Clarke et al., 1989a). Furthermore, it has been suggested that the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase may transport protons in the counterdirection to calcium (Levy et al., 1990). pH, therefore, appears to be an important parameter of enzyme function, and its influence on enzyme activity was examined, as shown in Fig. 7. COS cell microsomes expressing SERCA1, 2a, or 2b displayed essentially superimposable curves, which matched the accepted pH dependence of the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase: an optimum at about pH 6.8-7.0, which falls off rapidly at higher values (Inesi and de Meis, 1985). In contrast, the optimum pH for SERCA3 was shifted to about pH 7.2-7.4, with activity dropping off sharply below pH 7.0. Note, that at the pH of 7.0 used for all experiments, except those of Fig. 7, all isoforms are functioning close to their maximal rates.\n\nVanadate is a universal inhibitor of enzymes which form phosphorylated intermediates during their reaction cycle, probably because it resembles the transition state of the y-phosphate.\n\n\n\n---\n\n\n# Functional Comparison of Pumps\n\nphosphate of ATP during transfer to enzyme, and thus binds at the active site (Cantley et al., 1978). In addition, it has been reported that certain cells possess an ATP-dependent calcium uptake into subcellular organelles which is resistant to vanadate (Thevenod et al., 1989). Therefore, we investigated the interaction of vanadate with the SERCA isoforms by measuring the dose-response for vanadate inhibition of calcium uptake. The results, shown in Fig. 8, establish that SERCA B displays a markedly higher apparent affinity for vanadate than the other SERCA isoforms. This is consistent with the competitive effects of calcium and vanadate on the Ca2+-ATPase (Inesi, 1985).\n\nImportantly, the absence of ionophore allows calcium to accumulate in E-P vesicles, inhibiting calcium release and subsequent hydrolysis. These conditions have been demonstrated to result in stoichiometric trapping of phosphate on the Ca2+-ATPase (Barrabin et al., 1984). Furthermore, a qualitative estimate of the relative levels of SERCA2a to SERCA2b expression can be determined by examining the C4 antibody immunoblots (Fig. 1). This confirms the E-P data demonstrating that SERCA Pb is expressed at a level similar to SERCA2a.\n\n# DISCUSSION\n\nWe have employed a COS-1 cell expression system to examine the properties of different SERCA isoforms and found that the two non-muscle SERCA pumps, while similar in many respects to their muscle counterparts, also displayed clear functional differences. Immunocytochemical analysis revealed that all of the isoforms were present within the same, or similar, compartment when expressed in COS cells, as has been reported for chicken SERCA1, 2a, and 2b (Campbell et al., 1991). This is consistent with their similar behavior during cell fractionation and their similar calcium transport properties (such as oxalate dependence), both of which would be expected to change if the isoforms resided in distinct compartments. Accordingly, the COS-1 cell system appears to sort this group of proteins appropriately.\n\nThe high degree of sequence similarity among all of the SERCA isoforms, particularly the identity of residues implicated by mutagenesis studies as critical for enzyme function, suggests that these isozymes share a fundamental mechanism for binding calcium and coupling the subsequent hydrolysis of ATP to active transport (MacLennan, 1990; Inesi et al., 1990). Our finding of qualitatively similar transport capacities, similar calcium and ATP affinities, and most notably, virtually identical Hill coefficients supports this notion.\n\nNevertheless, we did observe that SERCA B turns over significantly more slowly than the other isoforms and that SERCA B has a reduced affinity for calcium, an increased affinity for the inhibitor vanadate, and an altered pH dependence. The apparent calcium affinities of expressed SERCA1, 2a, and probably 2b, are all similar (as also shown by Campbell et al. (1991) for the chicken isoforms) and identical to that measured for the Ca2+-ATPase of sarcoplasmic reticulum from fast-twitch skeletal muscle (which expresses SERCA1a). Cardiac muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase, on the other hand, displays a lower apparent affinity, despite expressing SERCA2a. It has been established that this results from the interaction of the Ca2+-ATPase with the integral membrane protein phospholamban in cardiac muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum (Tada et al., 1988; Fujii et al., 1990; Sasaki et al., 1992). Thus, the properties of the SERCA isoforms which we have determined in COS cells may not necessarily correspond to those of the molecules expressed in their native environment, where additional modulators may also be present.\n\nThe reduced affinity of SERCA3 for calcium compared to the other isoforms was somewhat unexpected, since all the residues implicated by mutagenesis studies to be involved in complexing calcium, or in positioning the binding ligands, are conserved (MacLennan, 1990; Lytton and MacLennan, 1991). An interesting comparison can be drawn between SERCA3 and the interaction of the Ca2+-ATPase with phospholamban, which also results in a reduction of the apparent calcium.\n\n# FIG.8. Vanadate inhibition of calcium transport.\n\nMicrosomes from COS cells transfected with the indicated SERCA constructs were preincubated in uptake buffer without ATP in the presence of different vanadate concentrations for 15 min at room temperature. Calcium uptake was initiated by the addition of ATP and stopped 10 min later. The data, which represent the average ± standard error of the mean for between three and nine separate determinations, are plotted as a percentage of the activity without vanadate.\n\n\n\n---\n\nComparison of SERCA Functional Pumps\n\naffinity of the enzyme. Recently, Sasaki et al. (1992) reported that a truncated, largely hydrophobic, phospholamban, missing the cytosolic amino terminus, retained the ability to shift the calcium affinity of the enzyme. A possible interpretation of these data is that an interaction between hydrophobic helices within the bilayer influences the position of key calcium-complexing residues, hence altering the binding affinity. The extension of this result is that amino acid differences within the bilayer between SERCA3 and other isoforms, although not close to the calcium-binding site, might nevertheless influence calcium affinity through helix-helix interactions.\n\nThere is an alternative explanation for calcium affinity shifts though, which results from the equilibrium between two major conformations of the Ca2+-ATPase, E1 and E2. Cytoplasmic calcium binds with high affinity to E1 and not to E2. If unoccupied E1 and E2 are in dynamic equilibrium, then shifting that equilibrium one way or the other will influence the apparent calcium affinity. In this model, phospholamban is thought to interact with the enzyme to shift the equilibrium toward E2, hence lowering the apparent calcium affinity (Tada et al., 1988). Similarly, it is possible that the reduced calcium affinity of SERCA3 reflects an intrinsic alteration in the E1 to E2 equilibrium. The vanadate inhibition data are consistent with such a model. Vanadate binds to the conformation of E2 of the enzyme, and thus the apparent vanadate affinity also depends upon the E1 to E2 equilibrium, but in an inverse manner to calcium which binds to E1. Thus, a shift toward E2, which will result in lower apparent calcium affinity, is expected to raise the apparent vanadate affinity. As seen in Fig. 8, SERCA3 is inhibited by almost 10-fold lower concentrations than the other SERCA isoforms, and thus has an apparently higher vanadate affinity.\n\nThe alkaline shift in the pH optimum for SERCA3 is consistent with a model of H+ competition at the high affinity calcium-binding sites (Inesi and de Meis, 1985). If, for example, carboxylate residue(s) participate in complexing calcium, then a rise in the pK of that residue would lead to a reduced calcium affinity. It is also possible, however, that the pH shift has its basis in the El to E2 equilibrium, just as the effects on both calcium and vanadate affinities may. This hypothesis is appealing because a single mechanistic alteration can explain all three experimental observations.\n\nThe expression of SERCA isoforms in COS cells has revealed clear functional differences between the non-muscle isoforms (SERCA3 and SERCA2) and their muscle counterparts (SERCA1 and SERCA2a). It is anticipated that a knowledge of the underlying structural alterations will provide new insights into the function of this important class of enzymes. The reduced turnover rate of SERCA3 suggests the possibility for an interaction of its extended carboxyl-terminal tail with another part of the molecule. The reduced calcium affinity of the SERCA3 isoform is especially intriguing, since at normal resting intracellular calcium levels it would be essentially inactive. This raises the possibility that the calcium affinity of SERCA3 is allosterically modulated in situ or that this isoform is expressed in an environment of chronically elevated calcium. The different pH and calcium dependencies of SERCA3 activity, as well as the similarity of its carboxyl terminus with the hypothesized endoplasmic reticulum retention signal of the adenovirus E3/19k protein, suggest that this isoform might be targeted to a unique subcellular location.\n\nAcknowledgments - We extend our gratitude to Randal J. Kaufman (Genetics Institute, Cambridge, MA) for the generous gift of the expression vectors p91023(B) and pRK1-4, as well as the clonal COS-1 cell line, M6, to Junichi Fujii (Osaka University, Japan) for his gift of canine cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum, and to Wes Westlin (Harvard Medical School) for assistance in immunofluorescent microphotography.\n\n# REFERENCES\n\n- Ausubel, F. M., Brent, R., Kingston, R. E., Moore, D. D., Seidman, J. G., Smith, J. A., and Struhl, K. (e&#x26;) (1992) Current Protocols in Molecular Biology, pp. 9.2.1-9.2.6, Greene Publishing Associates, New York\n- Barrahin, H., Scofano, M., and Inesi, G. (1984) Biochemistry 23, 1542-1548\n- Bian, J., Ghosh, T. K., Wang, J.-C., and Gill, D. L. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 16050-16055\n- Bradford, M. (1976) Anal. Biochem. 72, 248-254\n- Brandl, C. J., de Leon, S., Martin, D. R., and MacLennan, D. H. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262, 3768-3774\n- Brandl, C. J., Green, N. M., Korczak, B., and MacLennan, D. H. (1986) J. Biol. Chem. 261, 597-607\n- Burk, S. E., Lytton, J., MacLennan, D. H., and Shull, G. E. (1989) J. Biol. Chem. 264, 18561-18568\n- Campbell, A. M., Kessler, P. D., Sagara, Y., Inesi, G., and Fambrough, D. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 16050-16055\n- Campbell, K. P., and MacLennan, D. H. (1981) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 4626-4632\n- Cantley, L. C., Cantley, L. G., and Josephson, L. (1978) J. Biol. Chem. 252, 7421-7431\n- Carafoli, E. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 2115-2118\n- Chamberlain, B. K., and Fleischer, S. (1989) Methods Enzymol. 157, 91-99\n- Clarke, D. M., Loo, T. W., Inesi, G., and MacLennan, D. H. (1989) J. Biol. Chem. 264, 11246-11251\n- Fujii, J., Maruyama, K., Tada, M., and MacLennan, D. H. (1990) FEBS Lett. 273, 232-234\n- Gunteski-Hamblin, A., Greeb, J., and Shull, G. E. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 15032-15040\n- Harafui, H., and Owawa, M. (1980) J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 87, 1305-1312\n- Inesi, G. (1985) Annu. Rev. Physiol. 47, 573-601\n- Inesi, G., and de Meis, L. (1985) in The Enzymes of Biological Membranes (Martonosi, A. N., ed) Vol. 3, pp. 157-191, Plenum, New York\n- Inesi, G., Sumbilla, C., and Kirtley, M. E. (1990) Physiol. Rev. 70, 749-760\n- Kaufman, R. J. (1990) Methods Enzymol. 185, 487-511\n- Laemmli, U. K. (1970) Nature 227, 690-685\n- Levy, D., Seigneuret, M., Bluzat, A., and Rigaud, J.-L. (1990) J. Biol. Chem. 265, 19524-19534\n- Lytton, J., and MacLennan, D. H. (1991) in The Heart (Fozzard, H. A., Haber, E., Jennings, R. B., Katz, A. M., and Morgan, H. E., eds) 2nd ed., pp. 1203-1222, Raven Press, New York\n- Lytton, J., and Nigam, S. K. (1992) Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 4, 220-226\n- Lytton, J., Zarain-Herzberg, A., Periasamy, M., and MacLennan, D. H. (1989) J. Biol. Chem. 264, 7059-7065\n- Lytton, J., Westlin, M., and Hanley, M. R. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 17067-17071\n- Lytton, J., Westlin, M., Burk, J., Shull, G. E., MacLennan, D. H., and Hanley, M. R. (1991) Biophys. J. 69, 249a\n- MacLennan, D. H. (1990) Biophys. J. 58, 1355-1365\n- Maruyama, K., and MacLennan, D. H. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 86, 3314-3318\n- Maruyama, K., Clarke, D. M., Fujii, J., Loo, T. W., and MacLennan, D. H. (1989) Cell Motil. Cytoskel. 14, 26-34\n- Sagara, Y., and Inesi, G. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 13503-13506\n- Sasaki, T., Hi, M., Kimura, Y., Kuzuya, T., and Tada, M. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 1674-1679\n- Spamer, C., Heilmann, C., and Gerok, W. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262, 7782-7790\n- Tada, M., Kadoma, O., Inui, M., and Fujii, J. (1988) Methods Enzymol. 157, 107-154\n- Thastrup, O., Cullen, P. J., Drøbak, B. K., Hanley, R., and Dawson, P. (1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 87, 2466-2470\n- Thevenod, F., Dehlinger-Kremer, M., Kemmer, T. P., Christian, A.-L., Potter, B. V. L., and Schulz, I. (1989) J. Membr. Biol. 109, 173-186\n- Towbin, H., Staehelin, T., and Gordon, J. (1979) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 76, 4350-4354\n- Weber, K., and Osborn, M. (1969) Biol. Chem. 244, 4406-4412\n- Wu, K.-D., and Lytton, J. (unpublished observations)","job_metadata":{"credits_used":0,"job_credits_usage":0,"job_pages":7,"job_auto_mode_triggered_pages":0,"job_is_cache_hit":false}}