{"markdown":"\n# THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOL. 286, NO. 23, pp. 20591–20599, June 10, 2011\n\n© 2011 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc. Printed in the U.S.A.\n\n# Highly Cooperative Dependence of Sarco/Endoplasmic Reticulum Calcium ATPase (SERCA) 2a Pump Activity on Cytosolic Calcium in Living Cells*\n\nReceived for publication, November 18, 2010, and in revised form, April 20, 2011 Published, JBC Papers in Press, April 22, 2011, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M110.204685\n\nKanayo Satoh‡§1, Toru Matsu-ura‡2, Masahiro Enomoto‡3, Hideki Nakamura‡4, Takayuki Michikawa‡¶5,6, and Katsuhiko Mikoshiba‡¶7\n\nFrom the ‡Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan, the §Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan, and the ¶Japan Science and Technology Agency, International Cooperative Research Project and Solution-oriented Research for Science and Technology, Calcium Oscillation Project, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan\n\nSarco/endoplasmic reticulum (SR/ER) Ca²¹-ATPase (SERCA) is an intracellular Ca²¹ pump localized on the SR/ER membrane. The role of SERCA in refilling intracellular Ca²¹ stores is pivotal for maintaining intracellular Ca²¹ homeostasis, and disturbed SERCA activity causes many disease phenotypes, including heart failure, diabetes, cancer, and Alzheimer disease. Although SERCA activity has been described using a simple enzyme activity equation, the dynamics of SERCA activity in living cells is still unknown. To monitor SERCA activity in living cells, we constructed an enhanced CFP (ECFP)- and FlAsH-tagged SERCA2a, designated F-L577, which retains the ATP-dependent Ca²¹ pump activity. The FRET efficiency between ECFP and FlAsH of F-L577 is dependent on the conformational state of the molecule. ER luminal Ca²¹ imaging confirmed that the FRET signal changes directly reflect the Ca²¹ pump activity. Dual imaging of cytosolic Ca²¹ and the FRET signals of F-L577 in intact COS7 cells revealed that SERCA2a activity is coincident with the oscillatory cytosolic Ca²¹ concentration changes evoked by ATP stimulation. The Ca²¹ pump activity of SERCA2a in intact cells can be expressed by the Hill equation.\n\n* This work was supported by Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan Grants 20370054 (to T. M.) and 2022007 (to K. M.).\n\n□ The on-line version of this article (available at http://www.jbc.org) contains supplemental “Experimental Procedures,” Table S1, Figs. S1–S5, and additional references.\n\n1 Present address: Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, 6 Queen’s Park Crescent West, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H2, Canada.\n\n2 Present address: Dept. of Pathology and Laboratory of Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0529.\n\n3 Present address: Div. of Signaling Biology, Ontario Cancer Institute and Dept. of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada.\n\n4 Present address: Dept. of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan.\n\n5 Present address: Laboratory for Molecular Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.\n\n6 To whom correspondence may be addressed: Laboratory for Molecular Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. Tel.: 81-48-467-5906; Fax: 81-48-467-6079; E-mail: t-michikawa@brain.riken.jp.\n\n7 To whom correspondence may be addressed: Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. Tel.: 81-48-467-9745; Fax: 81-48-467-9744; E-mail: mikosiba@brain.riken.jp.\n\nThe abbreviations used are: SR/ER, sarco/endoplasmic reticulum; SERCA, sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase; ECFP, enhanced CFP; IP₃, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate; TC, tetracysteine.\n\nJUNE 10, 2011 • VOLUME 286 • NUMBER 23 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 20591\n\n\n\n---\n\nHighly Cooperative Ca²¹ Dependence of SERCA in Living Cells\n\nThe sequential conformational changes of SERCA are accompanied by active transport of 2 mol of Ca²¹ per 1 mol of bound ATP, and 1 mol of ATP is hydrolyzed during one reaction cycle (10). Thus, the conformational changes are directly linked with SERCA activity. Cytosolic Ca²¹ increases evoked by extracellular stimuli are often observed in the form of oscillating Ca²¹ spikes (11). In most cell types, Ca²¹ spikes are generated by inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP₃)-induced Ca²¹ release from intracellular Ca²¹ stores (12). The IP₃ receptor is an intracellular Ca²¹ release channel, and its activity is controlled by not only IP₃ but also cytosolic Ca²¹ (13). Because submicromolar Ca²¹ concentrations activate IP₃ receptor, the upstroke of Ca²¹ spikes may occur by regenerative Ca²¹ release through IP₃ receptor (14). On the other hand, the role of SERCA in the generation of Ca²¹ spikes is more passive. SERCA transports Ca²¹ back to the Ca²¹ stores at a rate that is solely dependent on the intracellular Ca²¹ concentration ([Ca²¹]i) (15). The pump activity of SERCA has been approximated by the Hill equation to have a Hill coefficient of 2 for Ca²¹ binding (16) in theoretical studies of Ca²¹ dynamics (15, 17). However, it remains to be elucidated whether the enzymatic activity of SERCA in living cells is identical to that measured in vitro.\n\nThe FRET technique is commonly used to study the conformational changes of functional proteins (18), and labeling with fluorescent proteins has been widely used for this purpose (19). However, as ectopic expression and/or dysfunction of the target protein can sometimes result from the labeling with these relatively large (27 kDa) proteins (20), techniques using small fluorescent molecules with less steric bulk have been greatly advanced (21). As an example, FlAsH-EDT₂ is a small membrane-permeable synthetic ligand with high affinity and specificity for a tetracysteine tag (CCPGCC; TC tag) (22). The binding of FlAsH-EDT₂ to a TC tag induces chromophore formation, giving rise to fluorescence (23). Real-time visualization of SERCA pump activity in living cells should facilitate our understanding of the mechanism for the generation of intracellular Ca²¹ dynamics. In this study, we successfully detected the pump activity of SERCA2a in living cells using the FRET technique with a combination of enhanced CFP (ECFP) and FlAsH. Dual imaging of intracellular Ca²¹ and the FRET signals of our ECFP- and FlAsH-tagged SERCA2a, designated F-L577, provides significant insights into the regulatory mechanism of SERCA pump activity in living cells.\n\n# EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES\n\n# Plasmid Constructions\n\nThe details of these procedures are given in the supplemental data.\n\n# Cell Culture and Transfection\n\nCOS7 cells were cultured in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 units/ml penicillin and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin, and maintained in a humidified incubator with 5% CO₂ at 37 °C. The cells were grown on 35-mm poly-L-lysine-coated glass-bottomed dishes (Matsunami). F-L577 and mRFP-KDEL cDNAs were transfected into the cells using TransIT (Mirus). The cells were used for experiments at 2 days after transfection. For FRET imaging, F-L577-expressing COS7 cells were loaded with FlAsH-EDT₂ reagent (Invitrogen) for 60 –90 min at room temperature and washed twice with BAL wash buffer (Invitrogen).\n\n# Western Blot Analysis\n\nF-L577-expressing and non-transfected COS7 cells (1 × 10⁶) were solubilized with 100 ml of 1 SDS sample buffer (2% SDS, 10% (w/v) glycerol, 5% (v/v) 2-b-mercaptoethanol, 0.05% bromphenol blue, 0.0625 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8). Aliquots (2 ml) of the cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot using the anti-SERCA2 antibody (BD Biosciences) at a dilution of 1:1000 and goat anti-mouse IgG, HRP-linked F(ab)₂ fragment (GE Healthcare) as the secondary antibody at a dilution of 1:2000. Signals were detected with an ECL kit (GE Healthcare) and an LAS-4000 Image Reader (FujiFilm).\n\n# Subcellular Localization of F-L577\n\nFluorescence images of F-L577 expressing COS7 cells were taken under a confocal scanning microscope (CSU-XI; Yokogawa) attached to an IX81 inverted microscope (Olympus) with an EMCCD camera (CascadeII; Roper) and a 60 (oil; numerical aperture, 1.42) objective lens (Olympus). A 440-nm excitation filter, a 520-nm emission filter, and 450-nm dichroic mirrors were inserted into the light path. Data were analyzed using MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices).\n\n# Acceptor Photobleaching\n\nAcceptor (FlAsH) photobleaching was performed using a confocal microscope (A1; Nikon). Repeated scans (120 s at maximum rates) with an unattenuated 514-nm illumination from a multi-argon laser were applied (total, 30 milliwatt maximum output). ECFP and FlAsH emission signals were acquired with a 515-nm dichroic mirror and a pair of 460 –500-nm and 520 – 620-nm band pass filters, respectively. Data were analyzed using NIS elements (Nikon) and MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices).\n\n# Generation of Recombinant Baculoviruses and Expression\n\nSpodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells (Invitrogen) were cultured at 27 °C with stirring in Sf-900II SFM medium (Invitrogen) containing 10% FBS. P1 viral stocks of recombinant baculoviruses for F-L577 and WT-SERCA2a were generated using a Bac-to-Bac Baculovirus Expression System (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Amplification of P2 viral stocks and recombinant protein expression of F-L577 and WT-SERCA2a were performed using Sf9 cells as described previously (24, 25).\n\n# In Vitro Kinetic Assay of ATP-induced Ca Uptake by SERCA Pump\n\nMicrosomal vesicles were prepared from Sf9 cells as described previously (26). The measurements and analysis of the ATP-induced Ca²¹ accumulation were conducted as described elsewhere. Briefly, the volume of the microsomal vesicles used in each measurement was adjusted using the absorbance at 600 nm acquired by a DU 640 spectrophotometer (Beckman Coulter). The microsomal vesicles were suspended in 500 ml of cytosol-like medium (110 mM KCl, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM KH₂PO₄, 1 mM DTT, 50 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.2, at room temperature), supplemented with 1 mg/ml oligomycin (Sigma), 2 mM MgCl₂, 25 mg/ml creatine kinase (Roche Diagnostics), 10 mM phosphocreatine (Sigma), and 2 mM fura-2 (Dojindo). The suspension was continuously stirred at 30 °C during measurements. The fluorescent signals of fura-2 were monitored with a\n\n9 M. Enomoto, T. Michikawa, and K. Mikoshiba, unpublished data.\n\n---\n\nHighly Cooperative Ca²¹ Dependence of SERCA in Living Cells\n\nCAF-110 spectrofluorometer (Jasco) and a PowerLab data acquisition system (ADInstruments). Fluorescence signals were recorded every 0.01 s at an emission wavelength of 510 nm with alternate excitation at 340 and 380 nm. The 1 mM ATP-induced Ca²¹ uptake into microsomal vesicles by the SERCA pump was initiated and monitored for 300 s. Free Ca²¹ concentrations were calculated from acquired fluorescent signals as described previously (27). To estimate the rate of Ca²¹ uptake, curve fitting of three-exponential function was conducted using Igor Pro 6.02 software (WaveMetrics) and t₁⁄₂ (half-decay time) was calculated.\n\nCell Permeabilization and State Fixation of F-L577—FlAsH-EDT₂-loaded F-L577-expressing COS7 cells were permeabilized with 60 mM b-escin (Sigma) in an internal solution (19 mM NaCl, 125 mM KCl, 10 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4) supplemented with 5 mM EGTA for 3–5 min. The permeabilized cells were gently washed with the internal solution containing 5 mM EGTA and then used for FRET measurements. Reagents for the fixation of F-L577 in the four major conformational states were prepared according to methods described previously in the crystallization experiments of SERCA1a (28 –31). Cells were perfused with an internal solution containing 30 mM thapsigargin and 5 mM EGTA for the E2 state; 100 mM CaCl₂ for the E1-Ca²¹ state; 1 mM ADP, 0.33 mM AlCl₃, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM MgCl₂, and 100 mM CaCl₂ for the E1-ATP state; or 2 mM BeCl₂, 8 mM NaF, 1 mM MgCl₂, and 5 mM EGTA for the E2P state. The free Ca²¹ concentration in the internal solutions was adjusted with K₂HEDTA and CaHEDTA at 37 °C as described previously (32). Fluorescent signals were acquired at 0.25 Hz with an IX71 inverted fluorescence microscope (Olympus) (see below).\n\nER Ca²¹ Imaging—ER luminal Ca²¹ imaging was performed with 10 mM Mag-Indo-1 AM (Molecular Probes), according to the method described previously (33, 34) with some modifications. The free Ca²¹ concentrations in the internal solutions were carefully adjusted with a Ca²¹ buffer and confirmed using a Ca²¹-sensitive electrode (Metrohm) prior to use (41). For FRET and Ca²¹ imaging, the permeabilized COS7 cells expressing F-L577 were perfused with the internal solution containing 1 mM free Ca²¹, and then 0.01, 0.1, or 1 mM MgATP (Sigma) was applied in the internal solution containing 1 mM free Ca²¹. Fluorescent signals were acquired at 0.25 Hz with an IX71 inverted microscope (Olympus) (see below).\n\nLive Cell Imaging—For imaging of intact cells, F-L577-expressing COS7 cells were loaded with 10 mM Indo-5F AM (Dojindo) and FlAsH-EDT₂ reagent. Images were obtained under a constant flow (2 ml/min) of a balanced salt solution containing 115 mM NaCl, 5.4 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl₂, 2 mM CaCl₂, 10 mM glucose, and 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.4. Fluorescent signals were acquired at 2 Hz with an IX71 inverted fluorescence microscope (see below). For [Ca²¹]i calibration, fluorescence imaging of F-L577 and Indo-5F was performed using the IX81 inverted microscope. [Ca²¹]i was calculated using the formula of Grynkiewicz et al. (27). After agonist stimulation (1 mM ATP for 2 min), the minimum and maximum fluorescence ratio of Indo-5F was obtained by treatment of the cells with 2 mM ionomycin (Br-A23187) and 5 mM EGTA followed by 2 mM ionomycin and 10 mM CaCl₂.\n\nImaging Equipment—Imaging in intact and permeabilized cells was performed at 37 °C using an IX71 or IX81 inverted microscope (Olympus) with a cooled CCD camera (ORCA-ER; Hamamatsu Photonics), a 40 (numerical aperture, 1.35) objective lens (Olympus) and a xenon lamp (Ushio). For fluorescent images of F-L577, Indo-5F (Dojindo), and Mag-Indo-1 (Molecular Probes), an emission splitter (W-view; Hamamatsu Photonics) was used with a light source exchanger (DG-4; Sutter Instrument Co.) on the IX71 inverted microscope. Sequential excitations of F-L577 and Indo-5F (or Mag-Indo-1) were performed using a 450-nm dichroic mirror and two excitation filters (425– 445 nm for F-L577, 360 nm for Indo-5F and Mag-Indo-1). Emissions were split with a 460 –510-nm filter (for F-L577, Indo-5F, and Mag-Indo-1), a long path 520-nm barrier filter (for F-L577) and two 505-nm dichroic mirrors (for all fluorophores) equipped in W-view. Images were acquired at 0.25 or 2 Hz, with an exposure time of 100 or 150 ms. For [Ca²¹]i calibration, fluorescence imaging of F-L577 and Indo-5F was performed using the IX81 inverted microscope equipped with two excitation filters (425– 445 nm for F-L577 and 333–348 nm for Indo-5F), two dichroic mirrors (450 nm for F-L577 and 400 nm for Indo-5F), two emission filters (460 –510 nm for F-L577 and Indo-5F, 515–565 nm for F-L577). The filters were controlled by Lambda 10 –2 (Sutter Instrument Co.) and IX2-RFACA (Olympus). Image acquisition was performed with the MetaFluor software (Molecular Devices). Offline analyses were performed with the MetaFluor Analyst software (Molecular Devices) and Igor Pro software (WaveMetrics).\n\n# RESULTS AND DISCUSSION\n\n# Construction and Characterization of Fluorescently Labeled SERCA2a\n\nFig. 1A shows a schematic representation of the F-L577 protein constructed in this study to investigate the conformational changes linked with SERCA2a activity in living cells. Because the N-terminal fusion of ECFP to SERCA1a has no notable effects on its ATPase activity (35), ECFP was fused to the N terminus of the A-domain of SERCA2a (Fig. 1A). The site of the TC tag insertion was determined based on the following criteria: 1) the relative distance between the donor and acceptor should change dramatically during the reaction cycle of SERCA, and 2) the site should be located within a surface loop connecting secondary structures, such as an α-helix and a β-sheet. Fig. 1B shows a schematic representation of the conformational changes during the reaction cycle of SERCA1a (28 –31, 36). Because the relative orientation of the N-domain is markedly changed during the cycle, the penultimate loop between Leu-577 and Glu-578 in the N-domain was chosen as the TC tag insertion site (Fig. 1, A and B).\n\nFig. 2A shows a Western blot analysis of F-L577 expressed in COS7 cells. The signal for F-L577 (lane 2) was detected with the expected size. The subcellular localization of F-L577 in the ER was confirmed by confocal microscopy (Fig. 2B). The ER was labeled by cotransfection with mRFP-KDEL (an ER-targeted monomeric red fluorescent protein) (34). The fluorescent signals of ECFP and FlAsH colocalized well with the mRFP-KDEL signals, indicating that the ECFP fusion and TC tag insertion did not disrupt the ER localization of F-L577.\n\nJUNE 10, 2011 •VOLUME 286 • NUMBER 23 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 20593\n\n---\n\nHighly Cooperative Ca²¹ Dependence of SERCA in Living Cells\n\nA Met 1 L577E578 Glu 997 A 242 B ECFP FIAsH F-L577 ECFPGSL SERCA2aTC-tag(-CCPGCC-) 125 - F-L577\n\nB <serca2 54=\"\" 70=\"\" 91=\"\" tc-tag=\"\" ecfp=\"\" -=\"\" mrfp-kdel=\"\" merge=\"\" n=\"\" 10um&#x3C;=\"\" p=\"\">\n\n</serca2>\nATP Mg+ c Photobleaching D100\n\nE1-Ca2+ TM E1-ATP 120 20⁸⁰ (6) H+ ADP 80 n.s. 60- FIAsH 40 20 T (8)\n\n0-0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 NC WT F-L577 Time (min)\n\n# FIGURE 2. The characterization of F-L577.\n\nA, Western blot analysis of endogenous SERCA2 and F-L577 with an anti-SERCA2 antibody. Cell lysates (2 ml each) prepared from non-transfected (lane 1) and F-L577-transfected (lane 2) COS7 cells were applied to the gel. Molecular mass markers (in kDa) are shown on the left.\n\nB, the subcellular distribution of F-L577 in COS7 cells. Confocal images of COS7 cells expressing F-L577 and mRFP-KDEL are shown.\n\nC, acceptor photobleaching of F-L577-expressing COS7 cells. Representative emission intensities of ECFP (continuous line, donor) and FlAsH (broken line, acceptor) are shown.\n\nD, half-decay times (t1/2) of ATP-induced Ca2+ uptake of microsomal vesicles prepared from non-infected Sf9 cells (NC) and Sf9 cells expressing recombinant WT-SERCA2a or F-L577 were calculated. The error bars represent the S.D. The numbers of measurements are shown in parentheses. **, p 0.01; n.s., not significant by Tukey-Kramer test. a.u., arbitrary units.\n\nConcluded that the ECFP fusion and TC tag insertion did not abolish the SERCA2 pump activity.\n\n# FRET Signals of F-L577 in Four Major Conformational States of SERCA\n\n—To examine the ability of F-L577 to reflect the various conformational changes linked to SERCA2 pump activity, we measured its FRET signals in the four major conformational states (Fig. 3A). To isolate these states, we performed state fixation of F-L577 expressed in COS7 cells. Briefly, permeabilized COS7 cells expressing F-L577 were initially perfused with an internal solution containing 5 mM EGTA to provide an arbitrary F-L577 reference state. The cells were then perfused with an internal solution containing 30 mM thapsigargin and 5 mM EGTA (E2 state) (29); 100 mM CaCl2 (E1-Ca2+ state) (28); 1 mM ADP, 0.33 mM AlCl3, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM MgCl2, and 100 mM CaCl2 (E1-ATP state) (30); or 2 mM BeCl2, 8 mM NaF, 1 mM MgCl2, and 5 mM EGTA (E2P state) (31). AlF4 and BeF3 are phosphate analogues that can be used to fix SERCA1a in the E1-ATP and E2P states, respectively (30, 36). Supplemental Fig. S2 shows the relationship between the FRET signals of F-L577 and the concentration of thapsigargin, as a SERCA-specific inhibitor, in permeabilized COS7 cells. The EC50 value was 20 mM, which was higher than that measured in vitro (37). Therefore, a saturating concentration (30 mM) of thapsigargin was used for the state fixation experiments. Fig. 3B shows representative traces of the FRET signal changes from the reference state to the four different states. The average values of the FRET signal changes (ΔR/Rbase) for the four different states are shown in Fig. 3C. When the cells were fixed in the E2 state (thapsigargin-bound state), F-L577 showed a 7.3 ± 1.6% (mean ± S.D.)\n\n20594 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 286 • NUMBER 23 • JUNE 10, 2011\n\n---\n\n\nHighly Cooperative Ca²¹ Dependence of SERCA in Living Cells\n\nbound state) showed 11.9  3.2% and 6.2  1.9% decreases relative to the baseline signal, respectively (Fig. 3, B and C). In contrast, the FRET signal showed a 2.4  0.86% increase following the transition from the reference state to the E2P state (Fig. 3, B and C). The overall dynamic range of the FRET signal changes of F-L577 was  15%.\n\nThe distances between the N terminus and Leu-577 of SERCA1a in the four major conformational states were calculated using the molecular modeling software PyMOL. The calculated distances were 39.19 Å in the E2 state (Protein Data Bank code 1IWO) (29), 69.79 Å in the E1-Ca²¹ state (Protein Data Bank code 1SU4) (28), 36.83 Å in the E1-ATP state (Protein Data Bank code 1T5T) (30), and 33.32 Å in the E2P state (Protein Data Bank code 3B9B) (36). Therefore, the order of the distance between the N terminus and Leu-577 was E1-Ca²¹ > E2 > E1-ATP > E2P. This order was consistent with the order of the relative amounts of the FRET signal changes of SERCA2a (Fig. 3C), suggesting that the FRET signal changes contain information about the distance between the N terminus and Leu-577.\n\nThe measured FRET signal changes were predictive of the defined structural changes during the cycling of SERCA, strongly suggesting that F-L577 is capable of detecting the conformational changes of SERCA2a.\n\nFRET Signal Changes of F-L577 Directly Reflect Ca²¹ Pump Activity—To confirm that the FRET signal changes of F-L577 reflect the Ca²¹ pump activity in living cells, we performed time-lapse dual imaging of F-L577 and the ER luminal Ca²¹ concentration during Ca²¹ pumping in permeabilized cells (Fig. 4A). For ER luminal Ca²¹ imaging, COS7 cells were loaded with a low affinity fluorescent Ca²¹ indicator, Mag-Indo-1 AM (Kd  35 mM) using a method described previously (33, 34). For time-lapse imaging during Ca²¹ pumping, a baseline was initially established by perfusion with an internal solution containing 1 mM Ca²¹ without MgATP. Under these ATP-free conditions, the E2 and E1-Ca²¹ states should dominate (Fig. 3A). To initiate Ca²¹ accumulation in the ER, 1 mM MgATP was added to the perfusate. Following the application of MgATP, the FRET signal of F-L577 increased by 3–6%, accompanied by an increase in the ER luminal Ca²¹ concentration (Fig. 4A). The increase in the FRET signal suggests that the fractions of the E1-ATP and E2P states, which showed higher FRET signals than the E2 and E1-Ca²¹ states (Fig. 3C), are increased when SERCA2a is activated.\n\nTo determine the timing of the FRET changes relative to Ca²¹ uptake, we compared the first derivatives of the two responses (Fig. 4B). The peak responses were detected at the same sampling points, indicating that the timing of the conformational changes of F-L577 was coincident with Ca²¹ uptake into the ER.\n\nThe Ca²¹ pump activity of SERCA2 is dependent on the ATP concentration (38). To measure the ATP dependence of the FRET signals of F-L577, we repeated the above experiments in the presence of 0.01, 0.1, or 1 mM ATP (Fig. 4C). The results demonstrated that the FRET signals of F-L577 showed ATP concentration-dependent changes (Fig. 4C, left) and that the ATP dependence of the FRET signals paralleled the accumulation of Ca²¹ into the ER lumen (Fig. 4C, right).\n\nWe further analyzed the correlation between the F-L577 FRET and Mag-Indo-1 responses (Fig. 4D). Interestingly, the F-L577 (R/Rbase) and Mag-Indo-1 (F/Fbase) responses were...\n\nJUNE 10, 2011 • VOLUME 286 • NUMBER 23 ASBME JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 20595\n\n\n---\n\nHighly Cooperative Ca²¹ Dependence of SERCA in Living Cells\n\n# FIGURE 4. FRET signal changes of F-L577 reflect the Ca²¹ uptake activity.\n\nA, representative traces of the FRET signal changes of F-L577 (R/Rbase) and the fluorescent signal changes of Mag-Indo-1 loaded in the ER (F/Fbase) induced by MgATP. An increase in F/Fbase represents Ca²¹ uptake from the cytosol to the ER lumen. F-L577-expressing permeabilized COS7 cells were stimulated with 0.01, 0.1, or 1 mM MgATP (black horizontal bars). White horizontal bars indicate the presence of 1 mM Ca²¹. Each image was acquired at 0.25 Hz. R, ratio of FlAsH fluorescence to ECFP fluorescence; Rbase, basal level of R; R/Rbase, (R - Rbase)/Rbase; F, fluorescence of Mag-Indo-1 at 450 – 495 nm; Fbase, basal level of F; F/Fbase, (F - Fbase)/Fbase.\n\nB, superimposition of the first derivatives of R/Rbase (d(R/Rbase)/dt; continuous lines) and F/Fbase (d(F/Fbase)/dt; broken lines). The lower panel shows magnified versions of parts of the traces in the upper panel (1–2 min).\n\nC, ATP dependences of R/Rbase and F/Fbase in the presence of 1 mM Ca²¹. The data represent means ± S.D. The numbers of measurements are shown in parentheses.\n\nD, the correlation between R/Rbase and F/Fbase. The data were analyzed by the Pearson correlation coefficient test (r = 0.767, n = 61, p = 0.001). The linear regression equation is y = 3.9702 x + 1 - 0.0233.\n\nE, Ca²¹ uptake (F/Fbase) of F-L577-expressing (1) and non-expressing ( ) cells under the three conditions shown on the right. The error bars represent the S.D. *, p &#x3C; 0.05, ***, p &#x3C; 0.001, by Student’s t-test. The numbers of measurements are shown in parentheses.\n\nsignificantly correlated (r = 0.767, n = 61). We also explored the effect of the cytosolic Ca²¹ concentration on the F-L577 response (supplemental Fig. S3). The FRET signal changes of F-L577 and the Mag-Indo-1 signal changes were significantly correlated even when the cytosolic Ca²¹ concentration varied from 0.13–1.0 mM (r = 0.651, n = 38). These results suggest that the positive FRET signal changes of F-L577 are directly correlated with the instantaneous Ca²¹ pump activity of SERCA2a.\n\nWe compared the Mag-Indo-1 signal changes of non-transfected cells and F-L577-expressing cells under three different conditions (Fig. 4E). When permeabilized COS7 cells were stimulated by 0.1 or 1 mM MgATP in an internal solution containing 1 mM Ca²¹, the Mag-Indo-1 signal change in F-L577-expressing cells was significantly larger than that in non-transfected cells. These results indicate that F-L577 itself has Ca²¹ pump activity in living cells.\n\nThe data described thus far demonstrate that 1) F-L577 shows different FRET signals depending on the conformational state, (2) the conformational change of F-L577 is coincident with Ca²¹ uptake, (3) the ATP and Ca²¹ concentration dependences of the F-L577 FRET signal are comparable with those of Ca²¹ uptake, (4) the FRET signal change of F-L577 is correlated with Ca²¹ uptake in permeabilized cells, and (5) F-L577 itself has Ca²¹ pump activity in living cells. In summary, the FRET signal changes of F-L577 directly reflect the Ca²¹ pump activity linked with its conformational changes in the SERCA reaction cycle.\n\n# Visualization of Ca²¹ Pump Activities of SERCA During Ca²¹ Oscillations in COS7 Cells\n\nTo investigate the dynamics of SERCA activity in living cells during ATP-evoked Ca²¹ oscillations, we performed dual imaging of intracellular Ca²¹ and the FRET signal changes of F-L577 in COS7 cells. Fig. 5A shows representative FRET signal changes of F-L577 (upper panel) and cytoplasmic Ca²¹ concentration changes (lower panel) observed in COS7 cells stimulated with 1 mM ATP. The FRET signals of F-L577 showed oscillatory dynamics during Ca²¹ oscillations. Although the oscillatory SERCA activity has been predictable, these findings comprise the first experimental evidence for the detection of oscillatory SERCA activity in living cells. The representative traces of the FRET signal changes of F-L577 (continuous line) and Ca²¹ changes (broken line) are also shown on an enlarged time scale (Fig. 5B). There was no detectable delay between the F-L577 signals and the Indo-5F signals during either the rising or falling phases of the Ca²¹ spikes. These findings indicate that the Ca²¹ pump activity of SERCA2a is synchronized with cytosolic Ca²¹ concentration changes without any detectable delay.\n\nFig. 5C shows the relationship between the FRET signal changes of F-L577 and [Ca²¹]i during the period of Ca²¹ oscillations.\n\nASBMO VOLUME 286 • NUMBER 23 • JUNE 10, 2011\n\n---\n\n\nHighly Cooperative Ca²¹ Dependence of SERCA in Living Cells\n\n# FIGURE 6.\n\nFRET signal changes of F-L577 under the steady-state condition. Ca²¹ sensitivity of the FRET signal changes of F-L577 (R/Rbase) in permeabilized F-L577-expressing COS7 cells is shown. FRET signal changes of F-L577 were induced by 1 mM MgATP in the presence of 0.13, 0.4, 1.0, 10, and 30 mM Ca²¹ as shown in Fig. 4. The values for R/Rbase under the equilibrium condition were plotted against the Ca²¹ concentration of each internal solution. The estimated values for the Kd and Hill coefficient by non-linear regression with the Hill equation are 0.46 ± 0.26 mM and 0.94 ± 0.41, respectively (means ± S.D.). The numbers of measurements are shown in parentheses.\n\nReported values (0.34 ± 0.45 mM) for native SERCA2a measured in vitro (15, 39, 40). In contrast, the high degree of cooperativity differed from that measured in vitro (16).\n\nTo determine whether the high degree of cooperativity shown in this in vivo experiment is due to overexpression of the SERCA pump or fluorescent labeling, we investigated the FRET signal change of F-L577 under the steady-state condition in [Ca²¹]i (Fig. 6). Fig. 6 shows the relationship between [Ca²¹]i in the solutions applied to permeabilized cells and the FRET signal change of F-L577. We found a good fit between the data and the Hill equation with an apparent affinity for Ca²¹ of 0.46 ± 0.26 mM and a Hill coefficient of 0.94 ± 0.41 (Fig. 6). Both the apparent Ca²¹ sensitivity of F-L577 and the Hill coefficient were consistent with that measured in vitro (15, 39, 40). These results confirm that the highly cooperative dependence of the FRET signal changes of F-L577 on cytosolic Ca²¹ does not arise from artifacts caused by the overexpression and/or fluorescent labeling. These findings indicate that the Ca²¹ pump activity of SERCA2a shows a high degree of cooperativity in the physiological condition of living cells.\n\n# FIGURE 5.\n\nFRET signal changes of F-L577 during Ca²¹ oscillations. A, FRET signal changes of F-L577 (R/Rbase) and fluorescence changes of Indo-5F (F/Fbase) evoked by 1 mM ATP (horizontal bar) in intact F-L577-expressing COS7 cells. B, the superimposition of representative traces of the F-L577 signal (continuous line) and Ca²¹ concentration (broken line) on an enlarged time scale. Each image was acquired at 2 Hz. C, Ca²¹ sensitivity of the FRET signal changes of F-L577 (R/Rbase) in intact COS7 cells. The values for R/Rbase during Ca²¹ oscillations were plotted against the calibrated Ca²¹ concentration. Filled circles, samples in the rising phase of Ca²¹ spikes; open circles, samples in the falling phase of Ca²¹ spikes; daggers, samples at the peak of Ca²¹ spikes. The estimated values for the Kd and Hill coefficient by non-linear regression with the Hill equation are 0.41 ± 0.0095 mM and 5.7 ± 0.73, respectively (means ± S.D.). The thin line shows the Hill equation with the same Kd value but a Hill coefficient of 2. The data were collected from six independent measurements with a sampling rate of 0.25 Hz.\n\nWe found a good fit between the data and the Hill equation with an apparent affinity for Ca²¹ of 0.41 ± 0.0095 mM and a Hill coefficient of 5.7 ± 0.73 (Fig. 5C). The apparent Ca²¹ sensitivity of F-L577 was consistent with previously reported values.\n\nJUNE 10, 2011 • VOLUME 286 • NUMBER 23 ASBME JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 20597\n\n\n---\n\n# Highly Cooperative Ca²¹ Dependence of SERCA in Living Cells\n\n# FIGURE 7. Effect of the nonlinearity of the Mag-Indo-1 signal on the ER luminal Ca²¹ concentration for the Hill coefficient estimation.\n\n# A\n\nThe normalized Ca²¹ titration curve of Mag-Indo-1 fluorescence intensity (F). The fluorescence intensity of Mag-Indo-1 was calculated by assuming a 1:1 interaction with a Kd value of 35 mM.\n\n# B\n\nThe relationship between the [Ca²¹]ER change ( [Ca²¹]ER) and the normalized Mag-Indo-1 signal relative to the baseline level. Six different baseline levels (Fbase  0.01, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7 of the maximum) were used.\n\n# C\n\nThe relationship between [Ca²¹]ER and the normalized FRET signal change of F-L577. The linear relationship between the Mag-Indo-1 signal and the FRET signal of F-L577 (y 213.9702 x 1 0.0233) (Fig. 4D) was used to convert F/Fbase to R/Rbase. The shaded area shows the range of the FRET signals of F-L577 measured during Ca²¹ oscillations in living cells (Fig. 5C).\n\n# D\n\nThe cytosolic Ca²¹ dependence on the SERCA2a pump activity was assessed by [Ca²¹]ER when Fbase 0.5. The measured values of R/Rbase of F-L577 shown in Fig. 5C were converted into [Ca²¹]ER by the relationship shown in Fig. 7C. The Hill coefficient of the best-fit equation is 5.7.\n\n# E\n\nThe Hill coefficient estimated from the cytosolic Ca²¹ dependence of the SERCA2a pump activity assessed by [Ca²¹]ER was plotted against the assumed Fbase value. The dashed line represents the average value of 5.7. Similar results were obtained when the linear relationship between the Mag-Indo-1 signal and the FRET signal of F-L577 in the presence of different [Ca²¹]i (y 2.5996, x 1 0.0881) (supplemental Fig. S3) was used to convert F/Fbase to R/Rbase. The error bars represent the S.D.\n\nand [Ca²¹]ER change when the basal Mag-Indo-1 signal was varied from 0.01 to 0.7 of the maximum. On the basis of the linear relationship between the Mag-Indo-1 signal and the FRET signal of F-L577 (Fig. 4D), we obtained the relationship between [Ca²¹]ER change and the FRET signal change of F-L577 (Fig. 7C). By using this relationship, we estimated the cytosolic Ca²¹ dependence of the SERCA pump activity, which was directly correlated with [Ca²¹]ER change (Fig. 7D). We found that the Hill coefficient of the cytosolic Ca²¹ dependence of the SERCA pump activity was almost constant regardless of the value of the basal Mag-Indo-1 signal (Fig. 7E). These results clearly demonstrate that the high cooperativity was not caused by a non-linear relationship between the Mag-Indo-1 signal and [Ca²¹]ER.\n\nThe cooperative dependence of SERCA on cytosolic Ca²¹ is an important parameter for the generation of complex Ca²¹ signals such as Ca²¹ oscillations because small changes in this parameter had a large impact on the behavior of the Ca²¹ dynamics. Similar to the action potential, which is generated by the combination of opposite membrane potential changes promoted by fast voltage-gated sodium channels and slowly activated voltage-gated potassium channels (41), cytosolic Ca²¹ spikes may be generated by the ingenious balance of Ca²¹ influx and Ca²¹ efflux promoted by Ca²¹ release channels and Ca²¹ pumps, respectively. Therefore, our findings provide us with evidence to reconsider not only the SERCA pump activity but also the Ca²¹ release activity in living cells to gain a better understanding of the mechanism underlying the generation of Ca²¹ dynamics. In addition, Ca²¹ is one of the most important cytosolic signals in living cells, but a prolonged elevation of the cytosolic Ca²¹ concentration results in irreversible damage, as observed during cardiac or cerebral ischemia (42). The high cooperativity of SERCA should work to rapidly take up intracellular Ca²¹ to reduce its cytotoxicity.\n\nCurrently, we do not know the exact reason for the discrepancy between the Hill coefficients measured in intact cells (nH  5.7  0.73) (Fig. 5C) and in vitro assays (nH  2) (16). To explore the mechanism for the highly cooperative dependence on cytosolic Ca²¹, we carried out a simulation analysis based on on cytosolic Ca²¹.\n\nASBME VOLUME 286 • NUMBER 23 • JUNE 10, 2011\n\n---\n\n\nHighly Cooperative Ca²¹ Dependence of SERCA in Living Cells\n\nthe six-state SERCA model described by Yano et al. (43) (supplemental Fig. S4A). The model includes the regulation of SERCA pump activity by both [Ca²¹]i and [Ca²¹]ER. The ATPase activity of the SERCA pump was calculated for a cycle of cytosolic Ca²¹ oscillation with a peak value of 1 mM and the baseline concentration of 150 nM with a sinusoidal decrease in [Ca²¹]ER (44). [Ca²¹]ER was set as 100 mM at the resting state, with the minimal [Ca²¹]ER set as 50 mM during the cycle. We found that nonlinear modulation of the rate of the transition from the E2 state to E1 state by cytosolic Ca²¹ can produce the highly cooperative dependence of SERCA activity on cytosolic Ca²¹ (supplemental Fig. S4B). We measured the intracellular distribution of F-L577 in COS7 cells before and after ATP stimulation (supplemental Fig. S5A) and found that the distribution of F-L577 was not largely changed after ATP stimulation, even though the FRET signal was changed significantly (supplemental Fig. S5C). These results suggest that the fluorescent signal changes of F-L577 are caused mainly by intramolecular FRET, rather than intermolecular FRET. Therefore, the high cooperativity obtained in this study is not derived from oligomeric interaction of SERCA pumps. These results suggest that factors such as Ca²¹-dependent SERCA binding proteins, which can be excluded by the permeabilization treatment, are involved in the modulation of the transition rate from the E2 state to the E1 state for the generation of the high cooperativity in living cells. In fact, there is a report that an interacting modulator, such as phospholamban, alters the cooperativity of Ca²¹ binding to SERCA (45). The mechanism of the highly cooperative dependence of SERCA2a pump activity on cytosolic Ca²¹ is an interesting issue to be clarified in future studies.\n\nIn conclusion, we succeeded in visualizing the dynamics of SERCA2a in living cells by constructing F-L577, whose FRET signal changes reflect the instantaneous Ca²¹ pump activity. We found that the Ca²¹ pump activity of SERCA2a is synchronized with cytosolic Ca²¹ concentration changes without delay during Ca²¹ oscillations observed in COS7 cells stimulated with ATP. The Ca²¹ pump activity of SERCA2a in intact cells can be expressed by the Hill equation with an apparent affinity for Ca²¹ of 0.41 ± 0.0095 mM and a Hill coefficient of 5.7 ± 0.73. The marked Ca²¹ dependence allows SERCA2a to act as a switch to refill the Ca²¹ stores efficiently. The F-L577 protein constructed in this study will be useful for future studies on Ca²¹ signaling in normal and abnormal cellular processes that involve SERCA pump activity.\n\nAcknowledgments—We thank Drs. Hiroko Bannai, Haruka Yamazaki, Mark W. Sherwood, Yoshiyuki Yamada, and Akitoshi Miyamoto for critical reading of the manuscript. We thank Akio Suzuki for technical help with the adjustment of the free Ca²¹ concentrations in the internal solutions.\n\n# REFERENCES\n\n1. Clapham, D. E. (2007) Cell 131, 1047–1058\n2. Berridge, M. J., Lipp, P., and Bootman, M. D. (2000) Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 1, 11–21\n3. Kubala, M. (2006) Proteins 64, 1–12\n4. Berridge, M. J., Bootman, M. D., and Roderick, H. L. (2003) Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4, 517–529\n5. Fewtrell, C. (1993) Annu. Rev. Physiol 55, 427–454\n6. Brini, M., and Carafoli, E. (2009) Physiol. Rev. 89, 1341–1378\n7. Pozzan, T., Rizzuto, R., Volpe, P., and Meldolesi, J. (1994) Physiol. Rev. 74, 595–636\n8. Toyoshima, C. (2008) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 476, 3–11\n9. Toyoshima, C., and Inesi, G. (2004) Annu. Rev. Biochem. 73, 269–292\n10. Inesi, G., Kurzmack, M., and Lewis, D. (1988) Methods Enzymol. 157, 154–190\n11. Tepikin, A. V., and Petersen, O. H. (1992) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1137, 197–207\n12. Berridge, M. J. (2009) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1793, 933–940\n13. Foskett, J. K., White, C., Cheung, K. H., and Mak, D. O. (2007) Physiol. Rev. 87, 593–658\n14. Matsu-ura, T., Michikawa, T., Inoue, T., Miyawaki, A., Yoshida, M., and Mikoshiba, K. (2006) J. Cell Biol. 173, 755–765\n15. Lytton, J., Westlin, M., Burk, S. E., Shull, G. E., and MacLennan, D. H. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 14483–14489\n16. Inesi, G., Sumbilla, C., and Kirtley, M. E. (1990) Physiol. Rev. 70, 749–760\n17. Keizer, J., and De Young, G. W. (1992) Biophys. J. 61, 649–660\n18. Selvin, P. R. (2000) Nat. Struct. Biol. 7, 730–734\n19. Herman, B., Krishnan, R. V., and Centonze, V. E. (2004) Methods Mol. Biol. 261, 351–370\n20. Giepmans, B. N., Adams, S. R., Ellisman, M. H., and Tsien, R. Y. (2006) Science 312, 217–224\n21. Tsao, M. L., Tian, F., and Schultz, P. G. (2005) Chembiochem. 6, 2147–2149\n22. Hoffmann, C., Gaietta, G., Bu S., Behr, B., ¨nemann, M., Adams, S. R., Oberdorff-Maass, Vilardaga, J. P., Tsien, R. Y., Ellisman, M. H., and Lohse, M. J. (2005) Nat. Methods 2, 171–176\n23. Martin, B. R., Giepmans, B. N., Adams, S. R., and Tsien, R. Y. (2005) Nat. Biotechnol. 23, 1308–1314\n24. Sano, K., Maeda, K., Oki, M., and Maeda, Y. (2002) FEBS Lett. 532, 143–146\n25. Yamazaki, H., Chan, J., R. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 15872–15880\n26. Ikura, M., Michikawa, T., and Mikoshiba, K. (2010) J. Biol. Chem. 285, 36081–36091\n27. Grynkiewicz, G., Poenie, M., and Tsien, R. Y. (1985) J. Biol. Chem. 260, 3440–3450\n28. Toyoshima, C., Nakasako, M., Nomura, H., and Ogawa, H. (2000) Nature 405, 647–655\n29. Toyoshima, C., and Nomura, H. (2002) Nature 418, 605–611\n30. Sørensen, T. L., Møller, J. V., and Nissen, P. (2004) Science 304, 1672–1675\n31. Toyoshima, C., Norimatsu, Y., Iwasawa, S., Tsuda, T., and Ogawa, H. (2007) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 19831–19836\n32. Michikawa, T., Hirota, J., Kawano, S., Hiraoka, M., Yamada, M., Furuichi, T., and Mikoshiba, K. (1999) Neuron 23, 799–808\n33. Hirose, K., Kadowaki, S., and Iino, M. (1998) J. Physiol. 506, 407–414\n34. Bannai, H., Inoue, T., Nakayama, T., Hattori, M., and Mikoshiba, K. (2004) J. Cell Sci. 117, 163–175\n35. Winters, D. L., Autry, J. M., Svensson, B., and Thomas, D. D. (2008) Biochemistry 47, 4246–4256\n36. Olesen, C., Picard, M., Winther, A. M., Gyrup, C., Morth, J. P., Oxvig, C., Møller, J. V., and Nissen, P. (2007) Nature 450, 1036–1042\n37. Sagara, Y., and Inesi, G. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 13503–13506\n38. Engelender, S., and De Meis, L. (1996) Mol. Pharmacol. 50, 1243–1252\n39. Campbell, A. M., Kessler, P. D., Sagara, Y., Inesi, G., and Fambrough, D. M. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 16050–16055\n40. Verboomen, H., Wuytack, F., De Smedt, H., Himpens, B., and Casteels, R. (1992) Biochem. J. 286, 591–595\n41. Hille, B. (2001) Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3rd Ed., Sinauer, Sunderland, MA\n42. Trump, B. F., and Berezesky, I. K. (1995) FASEB J. 9, 219–228\n43. Yano, K., Petersen, O. H., and Tepikin, A. V. (2004) Biochem. J. 383, 353–360\n44. Palmer, A. E., Jin, C., Reed, J. C., and Tsien, R. Y. (2004) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 17404–17409\n45. Trieber, C. A., Afara, M., and Young, H. S. (2009) Biochemistry 48, 9287–9296\n\nJUNE 10, 2011 •VOLUME 286 • NUMBER 23    JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 20599\n","job_metadata":{"credits_used":0,"job_credits_usage":0,"job_pages":9,"job_auto_mode_triggered_pages":0,"job_is_cache_hit":false}}